SEOUL, South Korea — South Korea said on Thursday that it would hold artillery drills in the coming days from the island attacked by the North last month, as an American governor traveled to Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, to try to ease tensions between the Asian neighbors.

South Korea’s Joint Chiefs of Staff said Yeonpyeong Island would be the site of a day of live-fire drills sometime between Saturday and Tuesday. South Korean marines will be joined by 20 American military personnel, according to the Yonhap news agency.

The announcement came as Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico flew into North Korea from Beijing. It was not clear whom Mr. Richardson, a former ambassador to the United Nations, would meet, but North-South tension was expected to be the top issue.

Two South Korean marines and two civilians were killed on Nov. 23 on Yeonpyeong Island in the Yellow Sea, when it came under artillery fire from North Korea.

The North said its artillery barrage was in retaliation for similar drills held by the South, during which shells landed in its territorial waters. South Korea said it was conducting a routine drill at the time of the shelling and accused the North of a premeditated attack.

Mr. Richardson, who has made several trips to North Korea, told reporters in Beijing that when the authorities in Pyongyang invited him to visit, “They always want to send a message of some kind.”

Analysts in Seoul said a similar tactic — the use of a nongovernmental go-between — was employed recently when Siegfried S. Hecker, the former head of the Los Alamos National Laboratory, was invited by the government in Pyongyang. Dr. Hecker was shown a new and sophisticated uranium-enrichment plant that North Korean officials said was already operational. The existence of the plant startled nuclear experts, diplomats and political leaders around the world.

“The problem is, there is no contact point,” said Park Tae-gyun, a history professor at Seoul National University, referring to the inability of the United States and South Korea to talk directly to leaders in the North. “There’s not even a hot line.”

The hot line that had been used in past years to defuse flare-ups or hold significant North-South dialogue is at Panmunjom, the so-called truce village on the border. But that line has been severed, and leaders in Seoul and Pyongyang now communicate by leaving messages for each other at an unofficial office at Kaesong, the jointly operated industrial park in the North. There is also a fax machine there.
