LOS ANGELES (AP) — Thousands of residents of the San Joaquin Valley farming community of McFarland were cleared to return home Monday after fears of major flooding prompted evacuations.

At one point, an estimated 400 to 500 homes were in danger as the result of stormy weather that has gripped California since late last week, triggering mostly minor flooding, mudslides, road closures and power outages.

Forecasters warned of worsening conditions Tuesday and Wednesday, as more storms bare down on the state and threaten to dump another 5 to 10 inches of rain.

In McFarland, resident Cristian Abundis, who lives on a street where water had been running a foot deep, returned from an evacuation center and was filling sand bags.

"We just want to be prepared," he said, dropping the bags around his doors and driveway.

Gary Farrell, general manager of the McFarland Parks and Recreation District, said the flooding was caused when Poso Creek, which runs south of McFarland, became clogged with debris and the creek overflowed. Santa Fe Railroad crews cleared the debris.

Elsewhere, a small twin-engine airplane was reported overdue on a 65-mile flight from Palm Springs to Chino, and the Riverside County Sheriff's Department intended to conduct a search while the Federal Aviation Administration checked with other airports to see if the pilot had diverted, FAA spokesman Ian Gregor said.

The Aero Commander's trip was under visual flight rules, meaning the pilot did not plan to talk to controllers.

Virtually the entire state was affected by the bad weather. On Sunday, rainfall records for the date fell, numerous traffic accidents snarled roads and trees tumbled.

Some locations in Southern California had received more than 12 inches of rain, said meteorologist Jamie Meier of the National Weather Service. It was the most rainfall in one storm event since 2005, he said.

"That will make for a pretty good wallop, especially considering how dry things have been for the last two years," Meier said.

The California Highway Patrol reported two rain-related traffic deaths Sunday. A 3-year-old boy was ejected from an SUV that went out of control in heavy rain in the Fresno area, and a 22-year-old man was thrown from a vehicle that hydroplaned and crashed in the Bakersfield area.

Flash-flood watches and warnings were in effect Monday for some places, particularly mountain areas still scarred by wildfires.

Residents of La Canada Flintridge were among those keeping a wary eye on the rain after a 250-square-mile wildfire last year denuded towering slopes above communities along the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains.

More than 40 homes in the hillside city just north of Los Angeles were damaged or destroyed by a mudslide in February.

"We've just had some sprinkling rains today. Occasionally it gets a littler harder but nothing to worry about," said Del Tucker, a retired geologist who has lived in the area since homes were built there in 1962.

Pacific Gas and Electric Co. crews were working to restore power to the last of about 282,000 customers that lost electricity since the storm arrived. Southern California Edison had 13,000 customers still without power Monday.

Repair crews braced for predicted winds of up to 45 mph, along with heavy rain and snow in elevated areas.

"The thing that we're seeing right now, we're starting to get reports of winds, and winds are what can cause more problems than the rain itself," Edison spokesman Steve Conroy said.

Elsewhere, a 20-mile stretch of scenic Pacific Coast Highway between Malibu and Oxnard was closed to commuters after a rock and mudslide Sunday night. The California Highway Patrol said no one was hurt. PCH also was closed for a time in Orange County by a mudslide at Dana Point.

In the inland region east of Los Angeles, a mudslide closed part of Interstate 215 in San Bernardino County.

Areas of the county that burned recently were under close watch, said fire spokeswoman Tracey Martinez.

"We're doing preparation because the height of the rain for our county is going to be Tuesday and Wednesday," she said. "There's thousands and thousands of sand bags, and I don't know how many tons of sand we've placed everywhere."

Eastbound Highway 71 in eastern Los Angeles County was closed because of potholes and flooding, and a number of mountain roads were closed.

In the San Bernardino Mountains, a 100-foot tree fell between two businesses in downtown Big Bear but only damaged a gazebo.

"It couldn't have landed more perfectly if we'd planned it," said Tiffany Swantek, a spokeswoman for the local sheriff's station.
