LONDON — Three professors walk into a pub.
Related

Malaysia Tries to Lure World-Class Institutes (December 20, 2010)
Work Remains to Ensure Equality in Grandes Écoles (December 20, 2010)
That’s not the setup for a joke, but an average evening out for Steve Cross, a former geneticist who is completely serious in his crusade to find new ways for academics to interact with the public.

Dr. Cross is behind Bright Club, “the thinking person’s variety night,” which each month puts university lecturers in front of a stand-up comedy audience.

“One thing universities are really good at is talking to people under 18, who are trying to decide where to go and what to study,” he said. “And of course we don’t have any trouble reaching people enrolled at university. But we haven’t really found a way to get people between the ages of 20 and 50 into the conversation.”

As University College London’s first-ever public engagement coordinator, Dr. Cross said he “talked to theater directors, museum curators, someone who runs science events — the idea was to find a way to get real researchers, talking about real research, in front of a different kind of audience than you’d get in a classroom.”

“Eventually we hit on the idea of stand-up comedy,” he said. Lest he appear frivolous, Dr. Cross hastened to point out: “There is serious psychology and neuroscience behind this.”

But if the atmosphere last week at the Wilmington Arms, an independent-music pub in a formerly industrial neighborhood, was any indication, science and laughter mix quite well. The Wilmington’s low-ceilinged black-wallpapered room was packed to hear the latest findings on this month’s theme — “Happiness” — from the fields of medicine, behavioral psychology, market research, economics and cognitive neuroscience.

After giving the crowd a chance to order beer, Dr. Cross introduced David Morgan, a 20-something professional comedian whose pompadour and big glasses gave him an intellectual air, and who acted as master of ceremonies, telling a few jokes to warm up the room: “I just saw a poll asking people what makes them happy. My favorite answer? Vengeance!”

Kathryn Waddington, a former nurse who lectures in City University of London’s Department of Applied Psychosocial Sciences, introduced her work on the role of gossip in hospitals with a PowerPoint presentation, about incontinence supplies, using words that cannot be repeated in a family newspaper. She was followed by Katherine Woolf, a researcher at the U.C.L. medical school, and Professor Ian Roberts, of the School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, who showed how our addiction to fossil fuels is slowly turning us into dinosaurs — at which point the audience, whistling and stomping their feet in appreciation, were made to sing along to a heavy-metal version of “Jingle Bells.”

What prompts tenured academics to risk their dignity in a setting so far removed from the safety of the classroom? “You can’t really let yourself go in a lecture,” said Dr. Roberts, who was recruited for Bright Club after the organizers saw a YouTube video from his tour promoting “The Energy Glut,” a book about the politics of obesity. “I’m always looking for ways of communicating what I do in a way that excites people.”

The first Bright Club evening was in May 2009. But in Britain the combination of science and spectacle has very deep roots.

“In the 19th century, the scientific lectures at the Royal Institution were so popular they had to make Albemarle Street the first one-way street in the world because of all the carriage traffic,” said Simon Singh, best-selling author of “Big Bang,” “Fermat’s Last Theorem” and other works of popular science. “You would often see Charles Dickens or members of the royal family in the front row,” he added.

In 2002, Dr. Singh, who emigrated to England from the Punjab as a child, and has a Ph.D. in particle physics from Cambridge University, teamed with Richard Wiseman, a psychologist and professional magician to present Theatre of Science at the Edinburgh Festival. Billed as “a heady mixture of probability theory, psychology and comedy” the show had successful runs in London and New York.

“I started giving talks in schools,” Dr. Singh said during an interview. “Teenagers are a very demanding audience. You have to persuade them that pulsars or cosmology is interesting.”

Concerned that British teenagers were abandoning science, Dr. Singh and Dr. Wiseman decided that scientists needed to make more of an effort to convey the excitement of their work to the general public. Pointing out that the physicist Stephen Hawking regularly fills 1,000-seat theaters, Dr. Singh challenged his colleagues to “move science out of the lecture hall and into cafes and pubs.”

More recently Dr. Singh has teamed up with the comedian Robin Ince. Last year, Mr. Ince followed his Edinburgh one-man show, “Carl Sagan Is My God, Oh And Richard Feynman Too,” with two appearances at Bright Club. His “Nine Lessons and Carols for Godless People,” a science variety format that includes turns by Dr. Singh, the biologist Richard Dawkins and the physicist Brian Cox, sold out a London theater for five nights last year.

“To have an audience of 3,000 people in a week and to be able to tell them something about the evolution of the universe is great,” Dr. Singh said.

For most Bright Club performers, though, even pub-size audiences can be daunting. Professor Sophie Scott’s stand-up debut inspired “sheer panic,” she said.

“It’s like going into an exam. You’re not allowed any books or notes,” said Dr. Scott, who studies “the neural basis of vocal communication” at U.C.L.

Yet her seemingly polished performance last week vindicated Dr. Cross’s advice to all novices: “Make sure you know your first line, because you’ll forget everything else. People will laugh, and then everything will come rushing back.”

In a star turn interrupted by frequent, raucous laughter from the audience, Dr. Scott ranged from brain chemistry to the social life of bonobo apes to the neuropsychology of disgust. “Would you wear Hitler’s jumper?” she asked, by way of illustrating how neutral, inanimate objects can be contaminated by association with their owners.

After asking the audience to imagine what it would be like to be a bonobo, spend their days having sex or tickling one another, she described the effect of laughter on the brain: “I’m not saying that laughter is like rough sex. I’m saying that it’s a little bit like rough sex.”

The Bright Club, financed by U.C.L., the United Kingdom Research Council and the Wellcome Trust, is taking its act to the 600-seat Bloomsbury Theatre in February. The theme will be “Life” said Dr. Cross, who was persuaded on stage at the Wellington Arms to sing a surprisingly convincing Elvis Presley version of “Silent Night.” Dr. Scott has already been booked for a return engagement.
