It may buzz at night or during Cubs games, but no one would describe predawn Wrigleyville as a beehive of activity — especially on the darkest day of the year, at the onset of winter.

But this Wednesday through Friday, as people have done for the last 19 years, 100 or so hardy souls will brave the cold and the hour to huddle in a second-story studio with east-facing windows for a musical séance conducted by the drummers Hamid Drake and Michael Zerang.

Starting at 6 a.m., they return to a time before there was a Christmas, when music meant drums, and early humans held back the winter dark with fire and song. At Links Hall at the corner of Clark and Newport, the fire comes from a dozen candles; the music comes from a variety of percussion instruments used to create hypnotic improvised symphonies — not a horn or a viol or a keyboard in sight.

The performance space resembles a drum warehouse during inventory. A pair of drum kits occupy center stage, surrounded by bells, shakers, gongs, tablas and other exotic instruments. These include the Middle Eastern darabuka, a goblet-shaped drum producing a crisp, iridescent sound; its cousin, the darker-sounding West African djembe; and several hand-held frame drums, made of animal skin stretched over hoops, from three continents.

“On the first day, around 3:30 in the morning, I find myself alone in the freezing cold carrying drums up the stairs,” Mr. Zerang said. “Twenty years ago that wasn’t such a big deal, but now...” He starts to laugh. “If we don’t go out after the concert, I’m home in bed for the rest of the day.”

Mr. Drake and Mr. Zerang, both in their mid-50s, start each Winter Solstice Concert playing a prearranged instrument, but nothing else is planned. They roam the room, using all the instruments as if performing a sacrament. The music, performed with jazz technique on ancient folk drums, flows in abstract ebbs and crests. They finish just as the sun breaks the horizon.

Their first concert, in 1990, was “very informal, just for family and friends,” said Mr. Zerang, burly with a pigtail braid of graying hair. “The next year, there was a line around the block, and we figured we’d better do more than one show.”

Mr. Drake, tall with an athletic build and imposing dreadlocks, is the more overtly spiritual of the two.

“Each year, the understanding of how we are all interdependently connected has grown a little deeper,” he said. “I feel we bring a certain energy to the city in general, that everyone involved in these celebrations, at whatever level, is consciously tapping deep into their awareness.”

From 1991 till 2000, the duo performed concerts at both sunrise and sunset for several days surrounding the solstice, which marks the first day of winter. For their 10th anniversary, they performed only sunrise concerts on 10 consecutive days — an Advent Calendar of drumming — before reverting to a more manageable three-morning schedule in 2001.

The concerts have become a compelling ritual for some. “There’s definitely a ‘solstice crowd’ who don’t show up at the clubs but come to these,” Mr. Zerang said. “There’s this one bike troop from Wilmette, I think, and they cycle down for the concert each year and go out for breakfast after.”

Both drummers live in Chicago, and both are highly respected within modern jazz and world music. But neither performs often at home, an indication of the demand for their work in New York and Europe.

Mr. Drake, who played with the late saxophonist Fred Anderson for more than 30 years, is a mainstay of groups led by new-music stars like William Parker, David Murray and the pioneering German saxophonist Peter Brötzmann. He also propels the Chicago-based Indigo Trio and a half-dozen other ensembles, as well as the “Materials” projects of Bill Laswell, a producer of avant-garde rock.

Mr. Zerang spent much of the fall touring with Mr. Brötzmann and another storied saxophonist, Joe McPhee, hitting 10 countries in three weeks. He is also an experimental theater composer (winning four Jeff Awards for his work with Redmoon Theater) and has presented music events at various locales. He often tours in the United States with a trio called the Friction Brothers, which bears no relation to a rock band bearing the same name; in Mr. Zerang’s group, one member plays dry ice.

The two drummers used to see each other often, either in Chicago or at international festivals, and played nonsolstice duets during the year. But their careers have diverged.

“We’re playing together less and less — maybe only once since last winter,” Mr. Zerang said. “But every year we meet for the solstice, and there’s always some sort of resonance from the sheer number of collaborators we’ve worked with since the last time.”

Mr. Drake added: “The solstice is about all of us — about our place in the cosmos. We have simply been fortunate enough in Chicago, as a community at Links Hall, at 6 o’clock on cold Chicago winter mornings, to express this body of work as a whole.”
