Rahm Emanuel, who has traveled the world, presumably hadn’t set eyes on anything like what adorned the head of a lady known as Queen Sister Georgetta Deloney during his 11-hour inquisition Tuesday before the Board of Elections.

Ms. Deloney’s hat resembled a gold-leaf bagel the size of a cruise ship’s life buoy topped with a mound of black caviar. It was arguably a highlight — sartorial or rhetorical — of a tedious exercise in democracy that might have left cynical Iraqis or Afghans wondering what we’re jamming down their throats.

One of many citizen interrogators, Ms. Deloney repetitively suggested that Mr. Emanuel was pulling a fast one and should have kept a place to sleep here even while working in Washington. Her denunciations aside, I couldn’t take my eyes off the headgear as I watched online.

There is, of course, a frequent nexus of politics and theater. Steppenwolf Theater’s current revival of “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?” comprises sharp, if subtle, 1960s social commentary. The Board of Elections’ long day’s journey into night with Mr. Emanuel offered little beyond his own disciplined, good-natured performance.

Sandwiched between my voyeuristic viewing and attending the Steppenwolf production that same evening was a memorial service for a most unusual man. It was a reminder about honor, courage and fine political theater.

The gathering honored John C. Tucker, a former Chicago lawyer who died in October. Mr. Tucker, 75, was an idiosyncratic longtime partner at the prominent firm Jenner & Block who moved to Virginia at the height of his professional powers to reinvent himself as a writer/fisherman/hunter.

Mr. Tucker was a chain-smoking, somewhat disheveled guy whose Chicago law office resembled a basement storage area. Fabled for tardy time sheets, he was more liberal and less administratively disciplined than most colleagues. But he was brilliant, the guy to go to, said a former colleague, “if you were in trouble.” This opinion was shared by a variety of sinners, including mobsters.

And, for sure, Mr. Tucker was involved in truly significant legal cases.

In Elrod v. Burns, he represented Republican deputy sheriffs who had been fired when Richard Elrod, a Democrat, was elected sheriff of Cook County. In its ruling in the case in 1976, the United States Supreme Court reversed the traditional American notion of “to the victors go the spoils” and said Mr. Elrod’s action violated First Amendment rights of nonpolicy-making employees to freedom of speech and association.

Along with that blow to patronage, Mr. Tucker helped secure a victory in an important death penalty case, Witherspoon v. Illinois. It involved a killer of a police officer whose jury was rid of anybody with reservations about the death penalty. The Supreme Court ruled in 1968 that you could not remove prospective jurors simply because they had such qualms. Because of the ruling, more than 350 men on American death rows were spared execution and resentenced.

But the program celebrating Mr. Tucker’s life didn’t feature a photo of him as sober litigator. Instead, there was a picture of him in a nervy skit, “Abbie in Wonderland,” in 1969 at the Chicago Bar Association’s annual Christmas Spirits show.

There, he impersonated Judge Julius J. Hoffman of Federal District Court, who was in the audience on opening night at the Chicago Hilton and was overseeing the Chicago Seven trial. The untidy proceeding resulted from demonstrations at the 1968 Democratic National Convention, with the political activist Abbie Hoffman a defendant.

It was an international cause célèbre, largely due to the high-handed ways of the judge, including his ordering a defendant, Bobby Seale, to be gagged and shackled. But Judge Hoffman had sympathizers, including many associated with the bar association.

“Off with his head!” Mr. Tucker would cry whenever the skit’s defense lawyers would raise objections. His Judge Hoffman assumed that a black defendant was a domestic mistakenly sitting at a counsel table and also issued the sentence before the jury’s verdict.

The skit inspired editorial outrage from The Chicago Tribune and Chicago Today, while The Chicago Sun-Times and Chicago Daily News voiced support.

The Tribune’s fulmination prompted the lawyer Julian Frazin, the skit’s author, to write a droll response via a poem read in subsequent performances by E. Leonard Rubin, also a lawyer and the show’s director. Mr. Rubin portrayed a defense lawyer as the March Hare from “Alice in Wonderland.” As they recalled Tuesday, the poem concluded:

And, if perchance, in our short show,

Their friends should take a rib,

Free speech, they would insist, belongs

Exclusively to the Trib.

It may not have been Edward Albee but, thankfully, it wasn’t the Board of Elections either. Belated thanks to Mr. Tucker and chums.
