DETROIT — When the Justice Department filed an antitrust lawsuit against Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan in October, the unusual action was widely seen as a warning shot to dominant health insurance carriers in many other states.

The case is viewed as a test for the Obama administration’s introduction of the federal health care law, which is aimed at spurring competition and driving down costs.

About half the states in the country, including Alabama, Rhode Island and Iowa, share circumstances similar to Michigan’s, in their relationships with a big single insurance carrier. Proponents of the new legislation have long argued that these dominant companies could subvert the competitive goals of the exchanges planned for 2014, which are intended to foster new business and cheaper coverage.

Officials “have been struggling for a while with the fact that in health insurance markets, small players are not able to enter and expand in a way to make them significant competitors,” said Jonathan M. Grossman, an antitrust lawyer at Cozen O’Connor. “Nobody can look at the suit against Michigan and say they didn’t put everybody on notice.”

Regulators worry that this prevailing dominance in markets across the country is a formidable obstacle. “Once you have a health plan that is that large, it’s really hard to change the dynamics of the market,” said Robert W. McCann, a health care lawyer in Washington at Drinker Biddle & Reath.

Blue Cross and others paint a far more complex picture, involving intertwined economic and demographic layers. Michigan might also become a proving ground for whether a federal overhaul of the markets would attract any new insurer, especially in tough economic times and with unabated health care costs. It may become increasingly apparent, some argue, that the battle to change the health care system will play out state by state, especially with the separate constitutional challenges mounted by nearly a dozen states against the law itself.

In Michigan, economic conditions alone pose steep challenges for Blue Cross, which still employs 7,100 people in the state. The recession further crippled an already deteriorating manufacturing base. Unemployment is well above the nation’s average, at 12.4 percent to the country’s 9.8 percent. Its population is declining, growing older and getting sicker.

While it remained profitable through investment and other income last year, with $22 billion in revenue, Blue Cross lost money from operations, including nearly a hundred million dollars because of its status in the state as the insurer of last resort.

Federal prosecutors contend that Blue Cross in Michigan thwarts competitors by pressuring hospitals to charge rival insurers more to provide care, a practice prosecutors say has made health care extremely expensive in a state that can’t afford it.

“It is deeply disturbing that Blue Cross, a nonprofit created to help Michigan citizens, would strong-arm hospitals at the expense of hard-working families,” said Mike Cox, the state’s attorney general.

This past Friday in its court response, Blue Cross fired back at the antitrust charges, relying mainly on states’ rights arguments to contend that the federal government was usurping the state’s ability to provide affordable health care coverage to its residents. The Justice Department says it continues to believe the insurer is stifling competition.

In a recent interview, Daniel J. Loepp, the insurer’s chief executive, said Blue Cross, which provides coverage for 4.3 million people, had done nothing wrong. “Our size is a benefit to the hospitals, and it is a benefit to our customers,” he said.

Many Blue Cross plans, which are frequently run as not-for-profits and operate in highly regulated states like New York and Michigan, argue that they are exactly the kind of insurer envisioned under the new law. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan says it is required to offer a policy for the same price to anyone who asks, regardless of whether that person has an expensive pre-existing condition. “It’s as close as you can come to a privately run public plan,” said Mr. Loepp.

The federal lawsuit is not the first attempt to curtail Blue Cross’s position in Michigan. Last year, state regulators blocked the insurer’s request for a 56 percent increase on some individual policies, and the Justice Department recently prevented Blue Cross from swallowing one of its rivals. Its main competitors are large hospital systems like Henry Ford and Spectrum Health, which largely offer H.M.O. plans. A few national carriers like Aetna and Humana also offer coverage.

Some state officials argue that the market is healthy enough. “Consumers have a variety of choices,” said Ken Ross, the state insurance commissioner. “They can buy high-quality affordable products other than Blue Cross.”
