TOKYO — Sony, the electronics and entertainment giant, acknowledged on Monday that reviews of its Internet-enabled Google TV had been mixed, but the company remained upbeat about its prospects, even as Google asked other television makers to delay new models until the software could be refined.

Several of Sony’s rivals, including Toshiba, LG Electronics and Sharp, had been prepared to show off versions of the Google TV at the Consumer Electronics Show next month in Las Vegas. But Google has asked those makers to delay their introductions, a sign of the difficulties the company has faced in making inroads into the unfamiliar realm of consumer electronics.

Sony, which developed the Google TV with the Internet search giant, and Intel started selling models in October. Logitech, the Swiss technology company, also sells Google TVs.

Speaking to reporters in Tokyo on Monday, Hiroshi Yoshioka, Sony’s executive deputy president and head of Sony’s television business, said sales of the Google TVs were “in line with expectations,” though he declined to give specific numbers.

He said sales were likely to pick up when more services were available from Google for televisions, including Android Market, from which users will be able to download applications onto their sets in early 2011.

Mr. Yoshioka agreed that initial reviews of the television were mixed. “Some reviews have been good, some have been bad,” he said. “It might take a little longer for users to really start having fun” with Google TVs, he said.

As for Sony’s TV business over all, Mr. Yoshioka said that the company would struggle to make the division profitable this year and that Sony would fall short of its goal to sell 25 million sets in the fiscal year ending in March.

Sales of Sony’s 3-D TVs, introduced in June, started slowly, though sales have picked up in November and December, Mr. Yoshioka said. The lack of content to view in 3-D — as well as misconceptions among users that 3-D televisions can’t show conventional 2-D images — seems to be hurting sales, he said.

Skeptics have also said consumers do not want to wear the clunky glasses that must be worn to see images in 3-D.

For now, Sony is aiming for 3-D televisions to make up 10 percent of its overall TV sales this fiscal year.

Still, Mr. Yoshioka said he expected 3-D capability to become a standard feature in the future.

But that could also mean that 3-D TVs will lose their price premium in an industry where price competition is fierce. Rivals, including Samsung of South Korea, the world’s biggest television maker by sales, are pushing their own versions of 3-D sets. Toshiba, meanwhile, intends to sell a 3-D set that does not require glasses, though only in small sizes.

Sony had been banking on its 3-D and Google TV models to finally get its television business back in the black after six years of losses. Sony dominated the market in the 1990s but has since fallen behind in market share for flat-panel liquid-crystal display televisions.

Sony dispatched 15 to 16 engineers to work with programmers at Google, which is based in based in Mountain View, Calif., full time on the Google TV project, Mr. Yoshioka said.

He said there was much more collaboration on Google TV than on Sony’s use of Google’s Android operating system for cellphones from Sony Ericsson, a joint venture between Sony and Swedish telecommunications giant.

The Google TVs, which run on Intel’s Atom chips, are close to full-fledged computers. They let users search for keywords to find shows and see when and where it is being broadcast, as well as viewing links to Web sites about the show.

But major American networks have been reluctant to provide shows on Google TV. NBC, CBS, ABC and Hulu have blocked people from watching full-length shows on their Web sites using Google TV, though users can pay to watch shows or movies on demand from Netflix or Amazon.

Samsung still plans to show off a forthcoming Google TV model at the Consumer Electronics Show, while Vizio will demonstrate its take on Google TV in private demonstrations.
