The Environmental Protection Agency announced tighter requirements on Friday for the second phase of General Electric’s cleanup of chemical pollution in the Hudson River, imposing a stringent limit for the first time on how much contamination can be capped and sealed on the riverbed rather than removed.

G.E. will be allowed to cap only 11 percent of the total project area, which stretches along 40 miles of the upper Hudson, from Hudson Falls to Troy, north of Albany, the agency said. That excludes areas where capping is unavoidable because of physical barriers in the river, which could amount to another 10 percent of the project, it added.

In the first phase of the project, involving work on six miles of the river from May to November 2009, the company capped nearly 37 percent of the polluted area.

The agency said it would also require tighter procedures for the dredging of sediments to remove PCBs, or polychlorinated biphenyls, that were discharged into the river by two G.E. factories in upstate New York over a 30-year period ending in 1977.

The E.P.A. said it foresaw completion of the cleanup in five to seven years.

G.E., which is conducting the work under the oversight of the environmental agency’s Superfund program, has until Jan. 14 to review the agency’s decision and to announce whether it will resume the cleanup in May. It has the option of rejecting the standards and pulling out of the job, risking a court fight and enormous penalties.

Agency officials said they had reached their decision after months of consultations with G.E., New York State officials, environmental groups and others and an analysis of technical information about the project.

Judith A. Enck, the agency’s regional administrator in New York, said the new standards relied “on the best science to ensure this dangerous pollution is addressed in an effective way.”

“E.P.A. has advanced a PCB cleanup plan that will require the removal of huge quantities of PCBs, making the Hudson River cleaner for future generations,” she added.

A spokesman for G.E., Mark Behan, said the company would review the new standards, and “if we determine that the plan is consistent with our technical discussions with E.P.A., and it’s based on sound science and it’s feasible to achieve, G.E. expects to move forward with Phase 2.”

Mr. Behan said the company had already spent $561 million on the design and execution of the project’s first phase, and had set aside “sufficient funding” to finish the cleanup. He declined to give a specific figure.

Lawrence Levine, a senior lawyer at the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group, described the standards for the second phase of the cleanup as a compromise.

“Under these cleanup standards, there’s no doubt we’ll have a much cleaner and healthier Hudson River than we do today,” Mr. Levine said. But he argued that allowing G.E. to cover over toxic contamination presented “the ongoing risk of it being stirred up once again in the years to come.”

But Ms. Enck said that even with capping, the cleanup was expected to remove most PCBs. “We believe that at least 95 percent of the PCBs in the dredge area will be removed,” she said in a telephone call with reporters. “We’re very proud of that number.”

She added G.E. was responsible for checking the capped areas every 10 years and maintaining them. “We’re confident that the capping will be effective,” she said.

A panel of independent scientists convened by the E.P.A. this year to review the first phase of the cleanup concluded that the effort had failed to meet standards consistently, including the levels of PCBs released into the water by the dredging itself and the levels remaining after an area was dredged or otherwise cleaned up. The panel called for “substantive changes” in the second phase.

In the next phase, E.P.A. officials said, they will require a maximum of three dredge passes, with the aim of limiting recontamination of the river. They will also mandate improvements in sampling for more accurate and complete information on the extent of the contamination.

From the 1940s to the 1970s, G.E. plants discharged approximately 1.3 million pounds of PCBs, cancer-causing chemicals that build up in fish over time, contaminating nearly 200 miles of the Hudson down to New York City, the agency estimates.

The dredging is confined to the most contaminated section of the river, amounting to about 490 acres of river bottom, but the goal is to sharply reduce the risk to people and animals from eating fish caught anywhere in the Hudson.

“This is about G.E.’s commitment to cleaning up the river,” said Stuart Gruskin, executive deputy commissioner of the State Department of Environmental Conservation. “This is the moment to make that commitment.”
