MOSCOW — Jamey Simpson has some advice for any 10-year-olds whose mothers are blasting off from Baikonur Cosmodrome, the massive Soviet-era space complex in Kazakhstan.

Acquire a hat as large and as furry as possible. Learn to love table tennis, which will consume many hours while your mother runs drills inside the spacecraft. And do not under any circumstances — even after the fire and thunder of blastoff fill the sky — participate in any toasts involving single-malt Scotch.

Jamey, a fourth grader from western Massachusetts, was killing time before dawn on Saturday at a division of the Central Scientific Research Institute of Machine Building, waiting to say hello to his mother, Catherine G. Coleman. She was 218 miles above western Africa, waiting to board the International Space Station for five months of scientific experiments.

Jamey has grown up among astronauts. He is capable of moving with great speed and agility through mission control to get to the buffet table. Space training is so familiar to him that during a recent visit to the cockpit of an airplane, he asked the captain if it was possible to go weightless, just for a minute. (“It’s called ‘floating the stewardess,’ ” his father, the glassmaker Josh Simpson, said helpfully.)

Jamey offered these thoughts from the Fishbowl, a glass-sided room that faces rows of technicians and screens showing the view from the Soyuz space capsule. If he has a complaint, it is the waiting. “When they say, ‘O.K., in about four hours something’s going to happen,’ and then, when it finally happens, it’s like, one little tiny thing,” he said. The view from the Soyuz showed the space station emerging out of the darkness. It was the size of a Volkswagen, then a Winnebago, then an apartment block. After takeoff last Wednesday, Ms. Coleman and her crew mates — Paolo Nespoli, an Italian, and Dmitri Kondratyev, the Russian commander — wore braces to keep their legs from breaking in case of violent impact with the ground. Outside the capsule, the temperature ranged from minus 148 (in the shade) to 302 (in the sun.)

For Jamey, his mother’s training has meant long and difficult separations. He barely got a chance talk to her the four days he was in Baikonur, he said, because the crew was kept in isolation to avoid exposure to infection. Jamey hugged his mother once or twice, quickly, behind a tree. When the Soyuz achieved orbit, the grown-ups were so relieved that they proposed a toast; Jamey, allotted a thimbleful of whiskey, required emergency treatment with candy. He described his feelings as “sort of disappointed and a little excited and happy and kind of sad.”

For the next five months, he will watch for her from his tree house at home in Shelburne Falls, Mass., which lost its roof in a storm. “You can just lie on the floor and look up and see all the stars,” he said. The space station “is pretty obvious. It’s the brightest light in the sky.”

Suddenly the room went silent. On the other side of the glass, the thrusters on the Soyuz were giving little flashes; the crew was so close to the space station that they could see their headlights reflected in the docking port. Little springs and hooks came into view. The crew inside, cocooned in pressure suits, watched the controls with rapt attention, ready to take over manually if something went wrong, said Chris Hadfield, a Canadian astronaut who was escorting in Russia Ms. Coleman’s family. He described the maneuver as “just barely possible.” Jamey held his breath, puffing out his cheeks.

“We’re docked, folks,” Mr. Hadfield announced, and the room erupted in applause. Three hours later, Ms. Coleman floated into one of the spokes of the space station, looking radiantly happy, a dog tag hovering in front of her face. She thumped her heart with her fist. Jamey said a few words to her over a video link — “I miss you a lot, and I’ll take care of Dad” — and then returned to the Fishbowl. He looked like a weight had been lifted off him.

“She should have gotten a better haircut, because her hair was going whoop,” he said.

He put his face up to the glass. On the monitors, you could see the sun rising in a yellow blaze over the side of planet Earth.

“I’d like to be up there,” he said, and smiled.
