The Caltech astronomy professor Mike Brown is not the first person to write about the rise of the planet Pluto (discovered in 1930 by Clyde Tombaugh) or its recent demotion (in 2006) to second-class citizenry in a newly reduced, eight-planet solar system. He may not even be the best, coming on the heels of Neil deGrasse Tyson’s breezy “Pluto Files,” the novel “Percival’s Planet” and at least one other nonfiction book on the cosmic Pluto flap.

But Dr. Brown has a unique distinction: He was, for a few hours in 2005, the only person on Planet Earth to know that the standard nine-planet solar system model was going to require rejiggering. He had just discovered a 10th potential planet, but he had also come to see that neither Pluto nor this new heavenly body (first nicknamed Xena, then officially named Eris) really measured up to the other eight.

“Don’t you think it would overall be better for astronomy to have new planets discovered than old planets killed?” Dr. Brown is asked by his wife in “How I Killed Pluto and Why it Had it Coming.” His answer led to a lot of trouble. He replied that he though it would be best to get the facts right.

There is ample precedent for the kind of upheaval that Dr. Brown helped to create. He cites an 1837 textbook that described an 11-planet solar system and points out that by 1851 another 15 celestial bodies had been added to the list. So shake-ups and re-evaluations are hardly unprecedented in the world of astronomy. Still, Dr. Brown casts himself as something of a gunslinger, unusual billing in a tale of scientific research.

He’s being facetious, as he often is in this short, eager-to-please research memoir. He has the kind of self-effacing, funny tone that must work well in a lecture hall. Thus he compares objects in the sky to fish in the ocean, with the asteroids as minnows, the major planets as whales and, within the Kuiper Belt beyond Neptune where Pluto and other dwarf planets can be found, “a previously overlooked collection of sardines swimming in a faraway sea.”

Dr. Brown’s efforts to study this region could not have been conducted in earlier times. He relied on the huge telescopes and computer software that have so drastically altered the science of astronomy, advances that have caused scientists to face new technology-induced questions. Is it easiest to study a vast and highly magnified image of the sky? Or is there such a thing as photography so precise that it fills the heavens with (to use Dr. Brown’s favorite type of metaphor) red herrings? How unwieldy is the huge amount of data that today’s instruments can produce?

And now that scientific information is stored in databases that can be accessed from anywhere in the world, what sort of ethics govern the use of that information? The most suspenseful part of “How I Killed Pluto” has to do with an unresolved dust-up between Dr. Brown and a Spanish group that jumped the gun to go public with the same information, a situation made even more ticklish by Dr. Brown’s detection of hacking in his research database. “Someone had come out of nowhere and kicked us in the gut,” he writes.

Conflicts over credit for astronomical discoveries have been around since the early 17th century, when Galileo used code and anagrams to protect his findings. But the speed with which discoveries can be made public has never been greater, and Dr. Brown found himself torn between the desire to be first and, as he saw it, the moral necessity of being right.

Eventually the pace would quicken when the whole Pluto question was taken up by the International Astronomical Association, an organization known for glacial pacing and rigorous rules. Dr. Brown and his team actually prepared four different news releases, anticipating the four possible outcomes of this group’s deliberations.

The four options: Xena would be named a 10th planet; Pluto would get the boot, leaving only eight planets; nothing at all would change; or the word “planet” would suddenly be redefined. “Why bother writing this one up?” one of Dr. Brown’s assistants asked about that fourth option. “It sounds crazy. No one would decide this, would they?”

They would, and they did, creating a class of dwarf planets that included Pluto and also creating one very large Grinch: Dr. Brown himself. He grew up with the planet-memorizing mnemonic “My Very Educated Mother Just Served Us Nine Pizzas.” Now he’s got a new one: “Mean Very Evil Men Just Shortened Up Nature.”

While the events in “How I Killed Pluto” were unfolding, Mr. Brown was also obsessed with a different kind of natural phenomenon. His slender, cheery book gets some padding in the form of his courtship, marriage, new fatherhood and (of course) blogging about his baby, Lilah. The presence of so many doting-father asides might get grating if Dr. Brown did not communicate his excitement and happiness so well and go about describing it in such wonky, scientific ways.

He used graph paper to chart the accuracy of babies’ due dates. He kept meticulous data on baby feedings. And when he concluded without talking to his sister that she must be pregnant, she asked the kind of question that gives Dr. Brown’s book its oddball edge. “Are you studying astronomy or astrology?” his sister wanted to know.
