After 16 years and $1.5 billion of other people’s money, it is almost showtime for NASA and Sam Ting.

Sitting and being fussed over by technicians in a clean room at the Kennedy Space Center in preparation for a February launching — and looking for all the world like a giant corrugated rain barrel — is an eight-ton assemblage of magnets, wires, iron, aluminum, silicon and electronics that is one of the most ambitious and complicated experiments ever to set out for space.

The experiment, if it succeeds, could help NASA take a giant step toward answering the question of what the universe is made of. It could also confer scientific glory on both the International Space Station and a celebrated physicist reaching one last time, literally, for the stars. If it fails, it will validate critics who think it a scandal the experiment was ever approved.

The device, named the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, is designed to sift the high-energy particles flying through space known as cosmic rays. On Feb. 27, the space shuttle Endeavour will ferry the spectrometer to a permanent berth on the space station. But the real destination is the shadow universe.

You might think you learned in high school that the universe is made of atoms and molecules, protons and electrons, stars and galaxies, but over the last few decades astronomers have concluded — not happily — that all this is just a scrim overlying a much vaster shadowy realm of invisible “dark matter” whose gravity determines the architecture of the cosmos.

If they are lucky, scientists say, the Alpha spectrometer could confirm that mysterious signals recorded by other satellites and balloons in recent years are emanations from that dark matter, revealing evidence of particles and forces that have only been theoretical dreams until now.

Even if dark matter won’t ever become the ultimate diet — eat it and disappear — knowing what nature is made of could be useful someday in ways nobody can dream. Einstein’s curved spacetime, equally elusive to the senses, proved crucial to the function of GPS devices that were invented decades after Einstein’s death.

Or the device could find even something weirder.

“Real discovery is outside the ring of existing knowledge,” said Samuel Chao Chung Ting, the 74-year-old Nobel laureate, Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor and leader of the cosmic ray project, in his laboratory at CERN outside Geneva in August. A few yards away, the hulking spectrometer was sitting in a test frame, being pinged by a beam of protons in final tests before being shipped to Cape Canaveral.

Dr. Ting, one of science’s great control freaks and worrywarts, has spent his life commanding armies of physicists. In 1974 he discovered a particle that would revolutionize physics, but he took so long checking for errors and looking for more particles that another lab found it and he wound up splitting the Nobel.

Gazing at his spectrometer, almost ready for space at last, Dr. Ting shrugged off the question of what he had up his sleeve next.

“You must think I am really stupid,” he said. “You see how much trouble this was.”

The experiment was born in the early 1990s when, despite his prestige, Dr. Ting failed to land a role on the largest physics machines ever contemplated, the Superconducting Supercollider (canceled before completion in 1993 by Congress) or the Large Hadron Collider (now operating at CERN, as the European Organization for Nuclear Research is known).

So he turned his eyes to the heavens. According to the laws of physics, equal amounts of matter and its science-fiction-sounding evil twin, antimatter, which annihilates ordinary matter in a flash of energy upon contact, should have been created during the Big Bang. It is one of the abiding mysteries of science why the universe is now all matter. Or is it?

The discovery of a single atomic nucleus heavier than anti-helium could mean there was an anti-star or maybe a whole anti-galaxy somewhere.

“If you don’t do the measurement, you will never know,” Dr. Ting said.

In 1994 Dr. Ting told Dan Goldin, then NASA’s administrator, that he could make that measurement with a space-based cosmic ray detector. Mr. Goldin was instantly smitten and agreed to put the spectrometer on the International Space Station, which was desperately lacking scientific credibility, bypassing the agency’s normal peer-review procedures and setting off resentment among other cosmic-ray physicists that still lingers.

Part of the lure was that the space agency would not have to pay for it. The bulk would be paid for by Dr. Ting’s army of collaborators abroad, which grew to 600 scientists from 16 countries, including Italy, Germany, Russia, China and Taiwan.

In 1998, a prototype of the spectrometer was built and flown successfully on the space shuttle for 10 days on a trip to the Mir space station, although not without some Tingian drama. Behind in the construction schedule, Dr. Ting announced one day that he was canceling the Christmas break. “Perhaps on Christmas Day we will take a few minutes to reflect,” Peter Fisher, an M.I.T. physicist who was there, recalled Dr. Ting saying.

The work got done on time.
