In November, I offered to make blini as an hors d’oeuvre for a Thanksgiving dinner. The hostess liked the idea, and I liked her reason: “They are instant festivity,” she wrote in an e-mail.
 
So they are. If you want something fun for a New Year’s Eve buffet, look no farther than these yeasted buckwheat pancakes. Although they are traditionally served with caviar and sour cream, blini also can be topped with delicious, healthy alternatives. We’ll try a few this week.

Buckwheat flour, as I’ve noted before, is a dark flour that contains four times as much fiber as whole-wheat flour and no gluten. (Blini, however, require a mixture of wheat flour and buckwheat flour, because it’s the gluten that stretches when the pancakes rise.) Buckwheat flour also contains complete protein, with all eight essential amino acids, and it is a good source of manganese and magnesium.

I also make blini with cornmeal, and these go particularly well with the vegetarian toppings I’ll be posting this week. You might also try them with some of the salsas in the Recipes for Health index, like roasted tomatillo salsa.

When serving blini as finger food, make each one small — about the size of a silver dollar. If serving them at a sit-down meal, blini should be the size of regular pancakes. Make them ahead of time if you need to, then freeze or refrigerate them. That way you’ll have plenty of time to get dressed for the party.

Buckwheat Blini

Blini go well with savory toppings liked smoked fish, and of course with caviar. A simple, elegant accompaniment would be smoked salmon (about 1/2 pound for one batch of blini), drained yogurt or reduced-fat sour cream, and salmon roe.

1 teaspoon active dry yeast

1/2 teaspoon sugar

2 tablespoons lukewarm water

1 cup plus 2 tablespoons lukewarm 1 percent or 2 percent milk

1 cup buckwheat flour

3/4 cup all-purpose flour

3/4 teaspoon salt

1/2 cup buttermilk or plain yogurt

2 tablespoons canola oil or melted butter

2 large eggs, separated

1. Dissolve the yeast and sugar in the water in a large bowl. Stir in the lukewarm milk, and let stand for five minutes until creamy.

2. Sift together the flours and salt into a medium bowl. Whisk into the yeast mixture. Whisk in the buttermilk or yogurt, the oil or melted butter, and the egg yolks. Cover the bowl tightly with plastic wrap, and set aside to rise in a warm spot for one hour or longer until bubbly.

3. Beat the egg whites to soft peaks. Fold them into the batter. Cover again, and allow to rise for another 30 minutes until bubbly.

4. Lightly grease a heavy nonstick or cast iron griddle, and heat over medium heat until hot. For bite-size blini that you can pass as hors d’oeuvres, ladle on 1 to 2 tablespoons of batter for each silver-dollar-size blini. For larger, pancake-sized blini, ladle on about 1/4 scant cup per blini. Cook until holes break through the upper side, about a minute. Turn and brown on the other side for about 30 seconds. Remove to a rack or a plate. If serving right away, wrap them in a towel or place them in a low oven to keep warm. If not serving right away, wrap them in foil and reheat them for about 20 minutes in a 325-degree oven.

To freeze, stack them between pieces of parchment or wax paper, and wrap them airtight in plastic, then foil. To thaw, remove them from the plastic, rewrap them in foil, and place them in a 350-degree oven for 30 minutes. Alternately, remove the foil and thaw them in a microwave oven.

Variation: For cornmeal blini, substitute 1 cup fine cornmeal for the buckwheat flour.

Yield: About 20 pancake-sized blini or 50 mini-blini, serving five to six as a main dish, 12 to 15 as an hors d’oeuvre

Advance preparation: Blini keep well for a couple of days in the refrigerator and can be frozen for up to a month. Whether refrigerating or freezing, stack them between layers of parchment or wax paper, wrap them airtight in plastic, and then place them in freezer bags.

Nutritional information per serving (five servings): 264 calories; 9 grams fat; 2 grams saturated fat; 88 grams cholesterol; 36 grams carbohydrates; 3 grams dietary fiber; 430 milligrams sodium; 10 grams protein

Nutritional information per blini: 66 calories; 2 grams fat; 0 grams saturated fat; 22 grams cholesterol; 9 grams carbohydrates; 1 gram dietary fiber; 108 milligrams sodium; 3 grams protein


