When Cliff Lee signed with the Phillies, the transformation was complete. Philadelphia officially became New York.

To be precise, the Lee signing signified the end of a joint Philadelphia-Boston program to divide New York City between them. Philly annexed baseball, the N.F.C. and telecommunications. Boston got the A.F.C., the N.B.A. and sports history. Boston and Philadelphia even established a demarcation line through Central Park at 97th Street. It will be called the Russell-Chamberlain Line, and it will be guarded by the 20-foot-high Whine-Boo Wall.

The transformation started when Philadelphia ceased to be the City of Brotherly Love and became the People’s Republic of Comcastistan. The acquisition of NBC Universal by Comcast upset the natural balance, like a tide-pond guppy swallowing a beluga whale. Soon, Cablevision went to war with Fox, and Philadelphians got to enjoy high-definition playoff baseball coverage while New Yorkers huddled under blankets with transistor radios and shouted score updates between tenement windows.

While Comcast wrapped coaxial tentacles around the East Coast, Rex Ryan tempered Jets fans for the Philly-Boston takeover. Ryan is the son of Buddy, Philly’s most ineffectual yet beloved coaching instigator, and he immediately stoked a blood feud with the New England Patriots, who responded by sweeping the Jets away like crumbs from a picnic table. The Jets now play the Minnesota Twins to the Patriots’ Yankees, snarling like feisty Pomeranians until the garden gate swings open.

Even Sal Alosi’s tripping a player along the Jets’ sideline fits the Philly playbook, and not just because Buddy Ryan offered $10 lube-shop coupons to any defender who hospitalized a kicker. Phillies Manager Gene Mauch once punched Mets catcher Jerry Grote for chasing a foul ball into the dugout, and Mauch was one of the city’s more cerebral coaches. Alosi’s trip is just part of the assimilation process. Do not fight it.

Boston’s encroachment from the north has been more subtle than Philly’s clamoring advance. With their win over the Knicks on Wednesday, the Celtics conquered the N.B.A., though Boston fans now demonize the Miami Heat as surrogate Yankees. The Knicks hope to acquire Carmelo Anthony to challenge the Celtics. If they recall Allen Iverson from Turkey instead, you will know the fix is in.

Even if the Celtics do not win the N.B.A. championship, in a few years, you may swear that they did. Ken Burns’s Ministry of Beantown Truth now controls our memories, and he is applying his Eternal Sunshine of the Documentarian’s Mind techniques to all the team sports. The Celtics have won the last 45 N.B.A. titles, and if you don’t believe it, Burns will pan across sepia-tinted images of Kevin McHale under a John Chancellor narration until you do.

The revisionist history is having an effect. Lee chose the Phillies in part because of the city’s — get this — reputable fan behavior. Yes, Philly sports fans are unfairly maligned, and only a few vomit like turkey vultures as an antiarrest mechanism, and Lee’s wife, Kristen, witnessed some ugly misbehavior from Yankees fans. Still, this is an amazing example of turn-on-a-dime image rehabilitation. Had Brian Cashman given Kristen Lee’s e-mail address to Wilma McNabb, he might have turned the tide of negotiations.

The Lee signing sent the Yankees scrambling to market like forgetful husbands who procrastinated about Christmas shopping until Dec. 24. Slapping a bow on Mark Prior is not quite as bad as handing your wife an unwrapped jug of off-brand perfume, but it is sad to see the Yankees mopping up flop sweat while the Phillies coin cute nicknames for their platinum-plated pitching staff. (R2C2, which sounds like a helpful robot, was chosen over H2OL, which sounds like either a programming language or an energy-drink-and-vodka cocktail that causes blindness.)

The Red Sox sensed weakness and took a swipe at the 41-year-old closer Mariano Rivera, but the Yankees managed to hold on to him for $30 million. It is all horribly backward: the Yankees nervously hoarding their chips while the Phillies and Red Sox up the ante.

The Giants were New York’s last, best hope to stop the Philly-Boston incursion before they went off the grid. Sometime between their snowbound exile in a Kansas City airport and their upstaging at the hand of a sideline-bound Brett Favre in a barely televised win against the Vikings, the Giants became the Jacksonville Jaguars, contenders on the side of the milk carton. Between Favre and Alosi’s battalion, the Giants cannot even wrest attention from inactive players, let alone the very active Michael Vick, who caused ripples last week by announcing that he wanted a new dog. (Fair enough. Just don’t let him have two dogs.)

The confluence of Lee’s return and Vick’s heroics have made Philly sports fans as happy they ever are, which means they are incrementally less miserable than usual. Philly talk-radio stations took on a pep-rally-like giddiness on Tuesday before one venerable sports columnist warned fans that the team did little to improve its bullpen. By Wednesday, fans were back to carping about the 76ers, fretting about the Phillies’ weakness at sixth base and expressing concern — far too late — that their city was turning into New York.

So if Philly is now New York and Boston is New Yahhhk, what about old New York herself? The sideline thuggery and sudden inferiority complex suggests that New York has become Philadelphia or Boston, but it is not that simple.

The Flyers are in first place, but the Rangers are keeping things competitive, and hockey can give the city a much-needed sports identity.

Congratulations, New York City, you are now Vancouver.
