The back seat of Bob Feller’s car had suddenly become uncomfortable, because for six days I was still trying to ask the question I had to ask. I had followed Feller and his wife, Anne, across a continent in an adventure that extended from a Tuesday night at the Bomber Bowl in Richland, Wash., to a Sunday morning at a small shop in Cooperstown, N.Y., down the street from the Baseball Hall of Fame.

I had spent a night in a guest room in their home at Gates Mills, Ohio, outside Cleveland, where Feller had built one of the most overpoweringly successful pitching careers in the history of the game in his Hall of Fame career with the Indians. Anne had retrieved dusty posters and forgotten mementos from closets, took them to a do-it-yourself frame store and created a minimuseum.

From the back seat, I had experienced a drive through a late-night rainstorm and early-morning departures on the way to the next appearance. I had shared in their search for places far from interstate highways, where unscheduled inspections of rusted old farm equipment were conducted in the hope that he just might discover a gem to buy and take home. “But what would you do with it?” Anne said one day with alarm in her voice.

I had listened to the give-and-take with fans old enough to remember his battles with Ted Williams and Joe DiMaggio and young enough to wonder if this aging gentleman seated behind a table had actually been as good as Dwight Gooden.

Bob Feller, who died Wednesday at 92, was still pitching after all these years. He was approaching his 67th birthday. Forty-nine years had passed since his major league debut, and 29 since his final game. Yet he continued to head from one ballpark to the next, where he would walk to a mound in a No. 19 Indians uniform and pitch to anyone willing to step into a batter’s box.

Now it was Sunday afternoon, and we were headed west after his appearance in Cooperstown, and I was still trying to find a diplomatic way to ask:

Why are you doing this?

In the days before ballparks pumped up the volume, Feller’s entrance was understated, sometimes without a word, like the one on a crisp, cloudy evening at Wahconah Park in Pittsfield, Mass., where a small crowd spotted No. 19 and began to applaud, on and on and on, a tribute far more respectful than cheers. Finally, the public-address announcer said, “Ladies and gentlemen, in case you don’t already know. ...”

Feller’s appearances gave him the chance to talk about the commitment to his country, his enlistment in the Navy immediately after the attack on Pearl Harbor, and his reminder that the true war heroes were the ones who did not survive. In his briefcase, a piece of paper held calculations in the event that his lost seasons could have been restored. The total of 266 career victories became 357. The 2,581 strikeouts became 3,516. The 44 shutouts became 65. The 279 complete games became 378. At the top of the page, a premise was written in red felt-tip pen:

WHAT IF NO WARS.

As he spoke to fans on that Sunday in Cooperstown, the questions had to do with a 46-year-old standard that had just been surpassed. In 1939, at the age of 20 years 10 months 5 days, Feller became the youngest major league pitcher to win 20 games. In that summer of 1985, Gooden’s 20th victory with the Mets had come at the age of 20 years 9 months 9 days.

“He’ll never complete 36 games in a season,” Feller said. “They don’t pitch him enough. He gets four days’ rest between starts. I only got three.”

When Gooden’s entrance to Cooperstown appeared to be a matter of time, the assessment sounded harsh enough for the fan to appear surprised. “He’s a heck of a good pitcher,” Feller said, and smiled. “I’m only kidding you, son.”

He was kidding to a point. “He’s got a great arm,” Feller said of Gooden afterward. “But what should they do, put him in the Hall of Fame tomorrow? Are you kidding?”

The car was heading west. The time was running out. Why is he doing this?

“I’m a promoter,” Feller said without taking his eyes off the highway. “People say, ‘Well, you’re out promoting Bob Feller.’ Well, who else would I be promoting?

“I could be in the insurance business, or I could be in the hotel business. I could probably do a lot of other things. Be on the circuit like all these defeated politicians. I’m doing what I want to do. If I want to go out and work on my tractor, plow the ground, put in some alfalfa or beans or fiddle around at home, I’ll do that. I can afford to do it.”

For all those summers, he chose the ballpark. By reminding us that baseball is as much about diamonds tucked into small towns as it is about big-city stadiums, Bob Feller celebrated his game, on his terms.
