On Dec. 10, Kerry Wood and his wife, Sarah, attended the funeral for Ron Santo in Chicago. The extended Cubs family said goodbye to a man who devoted his life to the long-suffering team, but the event helped bring Wood back home.

Perhaps more vulnerable to emotion than they might otherwise have been, the Woods left the services quietly discussing the notion of a return. The Cubs drafted Wood in 1995 and were the only team he knew until he left 13 years later.

Later that night, at a charity event hosted by Cubs pitcher Ryan Dempster, Wood spoke about the concept to Jim Hendry, the Cubs’ general manager. One week later, Wood was a Cub again, despite having received more lucrative contract offers from other teams.

“Me and Sarah walked into the service, and obviously there were hundreds of familiar faces,” Wood said Friday at a news conference at Wrigley Field. “We start talking and there’s teammates and ex-teammates there and everybody from the front office that I’ve become acquainted with the last 9 or 10 years I was here. It just started happening quick.”

Wood’s decision represented the second time this off-season that a free-agent pitcher eschewed a larger contract to play for a former team for which he felt a special bond, with both players rejecting the Yankees in the process.

Late Monday, the left-handed starter Cliff Lee turned down a more lucrative offer from the Yankees to sign with the Phillies. Later in the week, Wood said no to the Yankees, the Chicago White Sox and at least one other team to sign with the Cubs for one year and a $1.5 million base salary as a setup man, with the promise of future employment under a personal-services contract with the team once his playing days are over.

Both the Yankees and the White Sox offered Wood $3 million to $4 million, according to a person familiar with the negotiations. Wood has made close to $70 million in his career.

“There were plenty of offers out there,” he said. “We had three or four different teams that we could choose to go pitch for. There were a few different circumstances that came up that made me want to stay close to home. If I’m going to be in Chicago, I’m going to play for the North Side, so it eliminated the other teams pretty quickly.”

Drafted out of Grand Prairie High School in Texas as a power-throwing right-hander in the mold of Nolan Ryan and Roger Clemens, Wood burst onto the scene in 1998. In just his fifth start, he threw a 20-strikeout one-hitter on a snowy day against the Houston Astros to tie Clemens’s record for strikeouts in a game.

He won the National League Rookie of the Year Award, but he missed the 1999 season after elbow surgery, and for years he was plagued by arm injuries. After making only four starts in 2006, Wood was converted to a reliever for two seasons, then signed with the Cleveland Indians after the 2008 season. Last July 31, the Yankees beat the Red Sox to the punch by obtaining Wood in a trade, and he pitched well for them in a setup role for the rest of the season.

Although he has not fulfilled the expectations he generated in his rookie season, Wood has remained highly accountable. For millions of people, the fan Steve Bartman was to blame for the Cubs’ failure to make the World Series in 2003 when he tried to catch a foul ball in the Wrigley stands that outfielder Moises Alou had a play on in the sixth game of the National League Championship Series. The Cubs lost their lead and the game to the Florida Marlins, who went on to beat the Yankees in the World Series.

But it was Wood, who lost a two-run lead in the fifth inning of Game 7 of the N.L.C.S., who took full responsibility for the Cubs’ failure to reach the World Series for the first time in 58 years. In the somber aftermath of the devastating loss, Wood walked up to a small group of reporters and used words few athletes ever utter about themselves.

“You guys have got to understand one thing,” he said. “About 30 minutes ago, I choked out there. That’s the bottom line. I choked.”

With that, he walked away. A few years later, he left the Cubs. Now he has returned, with the opportunity to make up for both his playoff performance and his decision to leave.

“It’s never been about the money for me,” Wood said. “I did leave some money out there, but it’s about being at home. It’s about being here at Wrigley, which is home.”
