On the first Friday night of last season, the Kansas City Royals held a pregame ceremony to present Zack Greinke with his 2009 American League Cy Young Award. The team’s prior winners, the retired right-handers David Cone and Bret Saberhagen, showed up to honor him, all three aces dressed in official team warm-up jackets.

Greinke was treated as a king among Royals, with gifts including a specially made Cy Young ring, a set of golf clubs, a framed jersey and lineup card, and the pitcher’s rubber and home plate from Kauffman Stadium. His father received a watch, his wife and mother a Cy Young pendant.

Greinke smiled to the crowd and gave a little wave. But he did not say a word, and embarked on an ordinary season in which he seemed to struggle for motivation.

The Royals nurtured Greinke for nine professional seasons, and they had learned not to push him or expect too many social graces. He had left the game for almost a full year, in 2006, and is under medication for social anxiety disorder.

But that did not excuse the snub of last April, which deeply offended some in the organization. It was not the reason the Royals traded Greinke to the Milwaukee Brewers in a six-player deal Sunday, but it symbolized a relationship that had run its course.

Greinke acknowledged that on Sunday by waiving his no-trade clause without asking for anything in return. The Brewers also received shortstop Yuniesky Betancourt while sending four young players to the Royals: shortstop Alcides Escobar, center fielder Lorenzo Cain, reliever Jeremy Jeffress and the Class A starter Jake Odorizzi.

“We would love to be sitting here discussing a long-term contract with Zack Greinke,” Royals General Manager Dayton Moore said on a conference call from Kansas City. “You want to hold onto your best players forever. That’s a formula for winning championships as well.

“But there has to be a willing partner to go forward with that, and we actually went down that trail and discussed that trail with Zack, long term, and it was apparent that wasn’t something that he wanted to do. Therefore, we had to maximize his value and get players in return that blend in with what we have.”

The Royals have finished last or next to last in the American League Central in all seven of Greinke’s major league seasons. He has two years and $27 million remaining on his contract, and the Royals feared that Greinke could leave just as a celebrated prospect group started making an impact in 2012.

For the Brewers, the trade improves their chance to win while they still have their slugging first baseman, Prince Fielder, who can be a free agent after the 2011 season. Fielder’s agent, Scott Boras, almost always takes his players to the open market, and the Brewers would seem unlikely to outbid other teams.

Greinke is the second top pitcher the Brewers have acquired this month, joining the right-hander Shaun Marcum, who started last opening day for the Toronto Blue Jays. Marcum, who was acquired for the infield prospect Brett Lawrie, was 13-8 with a 3.64 earned run average last season.

Greinke was 10-14 with a 4.17 E.R.A. and more hits and walks per inning than Marcum. But he will be considered the Brewers’ new ace thanks to his Cy Young performance of 2009, when he was 16-8 while leading the majors with a 2.16 E.R.A.

Another mediocre season could have hurt Greinke’s trade value, and Moore capitalized while he was still a popular target. He said he spoke to most other teams over the last four months about Greinke, prioritizing shortstop, center field and catcher as areas of need.

The Yankees could have matched up with the Royals at catcher (Jesus Montero) and shortstop (Eduardo Nunez), but they were not sure how Greinke would adapt to New York. In any case, the Brewers offered familiarity to the Royals, whose manager, Ned Yost, is the former Milwaukee manager.

Escobar struggled at the plate in his first full major league season, with a sickly .288 on-base percentage, but he is considered an outstanding defender. Cain does not project as a star, but he is a smooth fielder with speed who hit .306 in 43 games for the Brewers last season.

Both pitchers in the deal are former first-round picks, and Jeffress has a fastball that hits 100 miles an hour. But he has also served a 100-game suspension in the minors for testing positive twice for marijuana.

“We’ve very confident with who he is and the track he is on as a person,” Moore said. “We’ve spent a lot of time dissecting that.”

Moore acknowledged it was rare for teams to trade a Cy Young Award winner and get similar impact players in return. But he said the Royals would be a deeper, more complete team in the future, and he praised Greinke for his achievements in Kansas City.

“A big part of my heart will always pull for Zack, what he overcame, the success that he had here,” Moore said. “It’s not easy to make these types of deals.”

The Royals, alas, have experience doing so. The Cy Young winners who flanked Greinke on the field last April, Cone and Saberhagen, were also traded away by Kansas City.
