We all love to jump to conclusions, make grand pronouncements, and not bother to wait until the unpredictability of life, and especially as it is embodied by the likes of Michael Vick, can sort itself out.

So there was a time Sunday at New Meadowlands Stadium when it appeared that Eli Manning, on his way to throwing four touchdown passes, would serve as Exhibit A on the virtues of the drop-back quarterback over the mad scrambler Vick.

When the life returned to Vick’s legs along with the accuracy of his left arm, it was time to wonder how well things might have turned out had Vick not been rallying the Eagles from a 31-10 deficit while running with the weight of Coach Andy Reid’s coaching blunders upon his back.

But 60 football minutes can be an eternity when the most elusive feet in the N.F.L. are reaping the benefits of their apparent pact with fate. When the clock finally struck 0:00, and the Giants were traumatized 38-31 losers to their divisional rivals in a battle for first place, it was Tom Coughlin, the Giants’ coach, who had to say this was the worst moment of his long coaching career.

“Never been around anything like this in my life,” he said.

There weren’t many folks who watched Vick destroy the Giants in the fourth quarter and DeSean Jackson return a punt 65 yards for a touchdown on the game’s final play who were about to disagree with him.

It is almost three years now since Coughlin experienced the kind of reversal of fortune that found Reid and the Eagles in the fourth quarter Sunday. When Manning somehow avoided the New England rush and landed a Hail Mary on the helmet of David Tyree, there was no way for him to conventionally break it down to an X or an O.

It was meant to be. It was fate. It was the Super Bowl and it was the moment that has eluded so many coaching lifers, Reid among them.

•

What happened Sunday — albeit in the 14th game of the regular season — may eventually be recalled as another career-changing occurrence for Coughlin. Ask Jim Fassel, Coughlin’s predecessor, who took the Giants to the Super Bowl but is still trying to live down a couple of egregiously blown playoff games, one at the old Giants Stadium against the Vikings and another in San Francisco.

At the very least, New Meadowlands Stadium, in its inaugural season, has a debacle of its own that, in a very different context, can match what happened in what is now the parking lot next door on Nov. 19, 1978.

The Fumble, the botched handoff between the Giants’ Joe Pisarcik and Larry Csonka that Herman Edwards scooped up like a $100 bill in the park, came against the Eagles. Maybe that’s just coincidence. Or maybe a hard fact that heightens the condemnation of Coughlin if the Giants don’t recover to make the playoffs.

And yes, there was another fumble to consider on the shocking denouement — Jackson’s muffing Matt Dodge’s punt, which should have been angled toward the sideline.

Coughlin claimed a high snap made the rookie Dodge rush. After the game, Dodge dressed quickly, but on his way to the parking lot, he stopped to say that the snap had nothing to do with his low-trajectory boot. “No, I can’t say that,” he said, which made you wonder if he was just covering for the snapper, Zak DeOssie.

Coughlin also had to explain why his team was so poorly prepared for the onside kick Reid ordered after Vick connected with his tight end, Brent Celek, for a 65-yard catch and run to bring the Eagles to 31-17 with 7 minutes 28 seconds left.

The game still seemed under the Giants’ control. But as Vick said, “Once we made a couple of big plays, I saw the momentum shift and they started to play real deep.”

It took five plays for Vick to get the Eagles into the end zone again. It took eight plays for him to scramble and pass them 88 yards to tie the game with 1:16 to go.

Reid was off the hook for not having Vick take a knee — as Pisarcik should have — when the Eagles were backed up in the dying seconds of the first half. Jeremy Maclin caught a short pass from Vick and fumbled. Manning threw an 8-yard touchdown pass to Hakeem Nicks to make it 24-3, Giants, at the half.

Even Jackson, brash as they come, said that he was thinking, “No way we can come back.”

•

By all rights, the Eagles should have really been finished when Jackson fumbled while falling forward — à la Eli in Philadelphia — after gaining 30 yards on a catch over the middle with 12:34 left in the game.

Reid didn’t ask for a replay despite Jackson’s belief that he was touched on the way down. Manning hit Kevin Boss for 8 yards and a touchdown. It was 31-10 and it was, of course, all over. Until it wasn’t. Until Vick, authoring a comeback for the ages, reminded us that life is an ongoing series of zigs and zags. Until Jackson somehow got behind the Giants’ punt team and was running parallel to the goal line before he crossed it.

He admitted to taunting the Giants a bit while trying to kill the clock, along with Coughlin’s karma. The coach’s exit was an unbecoming rage-filled tirade at Dodge. “Out of bounds!” he screamed. “Out of bounds!”

Then he was in the interview room, saying, “I’ll take full responsibility for the last play.”

Depending on how things play out, he may really have to.
