It’s the most wonderful time of the year, unless you’re an N.F.L. head coach with a struggling team. Want a taste of the high-wire act of a coach’s life? The Giants’ shocking collapse against the Philadelphia Eagles reignited talk that Tom Coughlin’s job could be on the line — even though the Giants can clinch a wild-card spot in the playoffs Sunday with a victory over Green Bay.

The team owner John Mara was quick to dismiss speculation that Coughlin’s job was in jeopardy and that the former Pittsburgh Steelers coach Bill Cowher was waiting in the wings. “That’s ridiculous” was how he put it to The Daily News.

But even if Coughlin is safe, the final two weeks of the regular season will be an exercise in coaches scrambling to hold on to their generous paychecks. This season has taken an odd toll — three coaches were fired during the season, unusual in a league that plays 16 games and in which conventional wisdom is that there is little time for a midseason turnaround.

But the success of the interim coaches Jason Garrett of the Dallas Cowboys and Leslie Frazier of the Minnesota Vikings might make the ground beneath struggling coaches even shakier next season. Neither the Cowboys nor the Vikings are going to the playoffs, but the interim coaches have breathed life into their teams and proven that a midseason shake-up, if nothing else, gets players’ attention.

The Cowboys are 4-2 under Garrett, with two road games to close out the season. Garrett has beaten two of the Cowboys’ division rivals — the Giants, in his first game as head coach, and the Washington Redskins on Sunday — and he will have a chance to beat a third when the Cowboys play the Eagles in the season finale.

Entering Monday night’s game against the Chicago Bears, Frazier was 2-1 as the Vikings’ head coach. His season has been marred by unimaginable problems: the home stadium is unusable and Brett Favre is unreliable.

Garrett and Frazier are almost certain to retain their jobs — Jerry Jones said the Cowboys were happy with Garrett even before the Redskins game.

That still leaves plenty of potential job openings to come. Denver, a mess after firing Josh McDaniels less than two years into his tenure, is likely to conduct a full search. The Broncos’ interim coach, Eric Studesville, is 0-2. In Carolina, John Fox’s fate was determined last season when he did not receive a contract extension. Mike Singletary could be out in San Francisco even though, incredibly, the 49ers are only one game back in the N.F.C. West. The A.F.C. North could lose Marvin Lewis (Cincinnati) and Eric Mangini (Cleveland).

But the wild cards come in the A.F.C. South, where the Tennessee Titans’ owner, Bud Adams, will have to sift through the power struggle of his own creation between quarterback Vince Young and Coach Jeff Fisher. Adams loves Young and could side with him despite his repeated shows of immaturity. If Fisher, the longest-tenured active head coach, goes, he will be in immediate demand elsewhere.

That is a lot of choices for coaching candidates, but none of those teams are likely to pay the top dollar that Jones would have for his coach. That most likely means that Cowher and Jon Gruden, the biggest names on the market, will stick with their television jobs for at least one more year, while another wave of coordinators seeking their first head jobs — think candidates in the mold of Mike Smith, Mike Tomlin and Raheem Morris, to name the most successful of the last wave — will flood the N.F.L. next season.

It was the Titans’ 31-17 victory over the Houston Texans that had the greatest potential to change the equation. The Texans appeared on the upswing after starting the season 4-2, but they have collapsed under the weight of a jaw-droppingly bad defense. The Texans fell behind by 21 points in the first quarter Sunday, and they have lost seven of eight games to waste a season in which the weakened Indianapolis Colts could have been supplanted as the division’s best team.

Coach Gary Kubiak appeared dumbfounded by how poorly his team had played, and he said his players looked slow moving around. That sounded like code words for the Texans not playing hard, and that gets an owner’s attention, as it did it Dallas.

Bob McNair, the Houston owner, said last week that he thought the Texans were on the right track and that other owners had told him they were impressed with his team.

“We’ll review everything at the end of the year, and, will we make some changes? I’m sure we will make some,” McNair said, according to the team’s Web site. “But we’re very, very close to having the kind of team I think that we can all be proud of.”

That does not sound like a coach preparing to dismantle his franchise, and McNair is not the impetuous type to react to a growing clamor among his fans. That is lucky for Kubiak. But for coaches in exile, it is bad news. McNair is the most likely owner to dig deep into his pockets to pay a new coach.

A New Game in Overtime

When team owners voted to change the overtime rules for playoff games — both teams get a possession if the team that has possession first does not score a touchdown — the move irked coaches. They wanted a uniform rule for the regular season and the postseason.

Now we know why. Coaches would have had plenty of opportunities to analyze strategy for the new overtime rules this season. When the Detroit Lions needed overtime to beat the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on Sunday, it was the 18th overtime game of the season. There has been at least one overtime game in 14 of the 15 weeks this season, the first time that has happened since overtime was instituted in 1984. The N.F.L. is on a pace to have 21 overtime games this season, which would tie for third most. (The most was 25 in 2002.)

That is 21 games of results coaches could have scrutinized when deciding how to handle overtime. Instead, playoff teams will have to shift gears on their overtime thinking — when will they settle for a field goal on the first drive, or would a team defer the opening kickoff to rely on its defense, as Jets Coach Rex Ryan suggested he might do?

In the summer, New England Patriots Coach Bill Belichick, a meticulous studier of strategy, said he and his coaches had done some preparation for the new rule. With the Patriots having clinched a playoff spot, Belichick is undoubtedly considering how he would approach overtime.

“We have talked about it in very general terms,” he said. “It’s a really hard situation. You have to re-educate your team to the new rule and maybe change your overtime philosophy and get your whole team to understand it.”

The Education of Tim Tebow

The Broncos started Tim Tebow at quarterback on Sunday, but he will not last long if he runs so much. That was how Tebow became a college phenomenon, and it has been the fear about him since then, too. Even a quarterback built like a linebacker cannot take the repeated pounding that comes with 78 yards rushing.

Tebow’s throwing mechanics are still not completely made over, but the next Broncos coaches will have their work cut out for them to create a full-time starter out of Tebow. That will be a challenge for Tebow, too. The coach who selected him is gone, and he may have to learn a new system in his second season, although he is far from mastering this one.

Redskins Back to Square One

Is all forgiven in Washington? Not quite. Rex Grossman showed why Mike Shanahan — and Kyle Shanahan, too — wanted him in the lineup over Donovan McNabb, throwing four touchdown passes in the Redskins’ 33-30 loss to the Cowboys. The offense had a rhythm it never did with McNabb. But then Good Rex transformed into Bad Rex again, and Grossman threw an interception just outside of field-goal range to end the Redskins’ final drive.

Grossman’s presence energized the offense, and Shanahan repeatedly made the point in his postgame comments that Grossman ran the system — a none-too-subtle indication of what he thought McNabb’s problem was. The bigger issue now is that when McNabb departs, as he inevitably will, the Redskins will still not have a franchise quarterback and they will not have the second-round draft pick they traded for him, either. They are starting over, again, after Shanahan’s botched personnel decision wasted a season.

Reverse Reward Out West

With the entire N.F.C. West losing last weekend, the 5-9 Niners remain in playoff contention. If they sweep and Seattle does not, the Niners could win the division at 7-9 and host a first-round playoff game. If that happens, the desire of the Atlanta Falcons’ president, Rich McKay, to get a new rule demanding playoff seeding based on record — not on being division champions — would gain traction among owners.

In the past, the proposal has garnered no more than 18 of the 24 votes necessary for passage, and the Giants owner John Mara said he was not optimistic much would change. But the prospect of a 12-win wild-card team like the New Orleans Saints going on the road to face a team with five fewer victories seems to dilute the importance of the regular season.

Rookies Struggling Under Center

Why do the Jon Kitnas and Mark Brunells of the world still have N.F.L. jobs long past their prime? Take a look at last weekend. Six rookie quarterbacks started games (only one — St. Louis’s Sam Bradford — began the season as the starter), and the results were predictable. Only one rookie — Carolina’s Jimmy Clausen — won his game. And Carolina’s victory over the rookie-led Arizona Cardinals (John Skelton) had little to do with Clausen. He completed 13 of 19 passes and threw one touchdown pass, but he was also sacked twice in a game in which the Panthers ran for 177 yards.
