Had the climb gone according to plan, it would have been shared every step of the way, every dollar raised, Martina from Mount Kilimanjaro calling out to the world for a good cause.

Beyond her unwillingness to be defined by age and odds, Martina Navratilova’s attempt to scale the 19,341-foot Kilimanjaro in Tanzania was made to raise awareness and money for philanthropic projects supported by the Laureus World Sports Academy, an association of 46 former sports stars.

But her quest just months after completing six weeks of radiation treatment for noninvasive breast cancer ended Friday, before the fifth day of a planned six-day journey, when she became ill and was taken off the mountain.

After being driven to the Kilimanjaro Christian Medical Center, Navratilova, 54, was flown to the Nairobi Hospital, where it was determined she had high altitude pulmonary edema.

Dr. David Silverstein, a consultant in cardiology and internal medicine at the Nairobi Hospital, said Navratilova would be treated with diuretics and would remain hospitalized for two to three days. Recovery, he said, is usually quick once the patient is removed from the high altitude.

“It was something that I have wanted to do for so long, but it was not to be,” Navratilova said in a statement. “I am so pleased that we got it going and I will be watching and waiting for news from the climb when they reach the summit.”

Navratilova was part of a team of 27 climbers. The grueling climb was made more difficult by turbulent weather.

Before embarking on the climb Monday, Navratilova visited a Laureus-supported project, the Mathare Youth Sports Association in Nairobi. In a telephone news conference on a car ride back to her hotel, she spoke of how pleased she was to learn that the association had added girls soccer programs in the time since she had last visited and how the program had become an oasis of recreation in a sprawling ghetto.

Having agreed to make the climb before the diagnosis was made in February, Navratilova said she was determined to go through with it because when “climbing the tallest mountain, you’re getting a lot of attention,” and that would help her goal of raising money. But she admitted to a fascination with Africa dating to a visit to Kenya and Tanzania in 1997.

“I was a tennis player for a long time, but I always liked to pride myself on the fact that I tried to get the most out of me,” she said. “I had a terrible fear of flying, so I got a pilot’s license. I had a fear of drowning, so I got a scuba license. But I don’t do crazy stuff, where if I fail I die.”

Navratilova said she missed one day of playing tennis during her radiation treatments and recalled two naps she would not have ordinarily taken. But while confident in her fitness, she acknowledged that she was undertaking a challenge under conditions she could not replicate in training.

“Of course, being in good shape helps,” she said. “But altitude is not something you can overcome with willpower. It can get kind of silly at 14,000, 15,000 feet. It’s just going to get harder and harder, colder and colder.”

Navratilova planned to file daily blog posts on the trek, fill Web sites with photos and conduct interviews on specific days with reporters from select news media outlets via satellite telephone. But as the weather worsened, the interviews were postponed and finally canceled.

In her last blog entry, she wrote, “The weather is a little better but the going is getting tougher and tougher.” She added, “Sheer exhaustion sets in for much of the group, and with heavy legs and chests pounding due to a lack of oxygen, every step becomes an effort.”
