BELGRADE, Serbia (AP) — Serbia celebrated its first Davis Cup title Sunday, becoming the second unseeded nation to win the trophy when Viktor Troicki beat Michael Llodra, 6-2, 6-2, 6-3, to complete a 3-2 comeback victory over France.

Troicki, who had replaced Janko Tipsarevic in the final singles match, dropped to the court in jubilation after his victory, and his teammates fell into one another’s arms to celebrate. The Serbian players kept their promise to have their heads shaved on the court.

“This is unbelievable,” Troicki said. “I don’t know how to react, what to do. This is the best moment of my life.”

Croatia was the first unseeded nation to win the title, in 2005.

France was leading, 2-1, in the best-of-five-series after winning the doubles Saturday in its bid to capture its 10th Davis Cup and first since 2001.

Novak Djokovic tied the series by beating Gaël Monfils, 6-2, 6-2, 6-4, in Sunday’s first singles match.

Troicki then played some of his best tennis, continually passing Llodra, a serve-and-volley specialist who was left standing stunned at the net.

“This is the best moment of my career and probably of my nation,” Djokovic said. “This is like winning the World Cup for us.”

Troicki, ranked 30th in the world, broke Llodra’s serve twice in each set and hit 58 winners compared with 32 for Llodra. Troicki won the match with a crosscourt passing shot that left Llodra flat-footed at the net.

“A lot of emotions went through my head at that moment, remembering when I was a kid and dreaming to one day play in such a match,” Troicki said.

Serbia reached the final after beating the United States, Croatia and the Czech Republic. The team reached the World Group for the first time in 2008 and twice had to win playoffs to stay in the top tier.

The third-ranked Djokovic started the comeback, breaking the 12th-ranked Monfils twice in each of the first two sets.

Djokovic’s first break came in the fourth game of the first set when Monfils attempted a forehand between his legs while leading, 30-0. He failed, had to change his racket after hitting it on the turf and lost the next four points.

“It was unbelievable today,” Djokovic said. “Under the circumstances, maybe one of the best matches I have played this year. It was definitely a lot of pressure, expectations.”
