John and Abigail Adams not only had one of the most documented marriages in early American history, but their partnership — chronicled in some 1,200 letters — was also uncannily modern. It was a marriage based on mutual intellectual passions, enduring sexual and emotional chemistry, and commitment to a shared political vision. For the irascible and highly volatile John, Abigail was a psychological anchor and trusted confidante; for the saucy and independent Abigail, John was a brilliant and courageous visionary who shared her love of books and playful sense of humor. She called him “My Dearest Friend.” He called her “Miss Adorable” and his “Heroine.”

Although the gender politics of the day did not afford Abigail the opportunities enjoyed by later generations of women, she was John Adams’s closest adviser and sounding board before, during and after the Revolutionary War. During his long absences from home, Abigail managed the family farm, oversaw their finances and raised their children. Later, during his diplomatic postings in Paris and London and his tenure as president, she assumed a more public role, so much so that the historian Joseph J. Ellis writes in his new book that “they were effectively regarded as a political team” — or as one television dramatization of their lives more crudely put it, “America’s first power couple.”

There have been numerous collections of John and Abigail’s wonderfully candid and witty letters, of course, and several biographies of Abigail, including Phyllis Lee Levin’s “Abigail Adams,” Edith Gelles’s “Portia: the World of Abigail Adams” and, most recently, Woody Holton’s “Abigail Adams.” But Mr. Ellis — the author of an astute 1993 portrait of John Adams (“Passionate Sage: The Character and Legacy of John Adams”), as well as of books on Thomas Jefferson, George Washington and other members of the Revolutionary generation — uses his easy familiarity with the era to invest his portrait of the couple with authoritative historical perspective. We may not learn anything appreciably new about the Adams family, per se, but in “First Family” Mr. Ellis employs his narrative gifts to draw a remarkably intimate portrait of John and Abigail’s marriage as it played out against the momentous events that marked the birth of a nation.

Mr. Ellis’s earlier book on Adams underscored the prescience of Adams’s thinking and ushered him out from under the historical shadow of his great friend and rival Jefferson. The John Adams who emerges from this volume is the same captivating, cantankerous and contrary genius readers will remember from “Passionate Sage,” but Mr. Ellis puts new emphasis here on the fallout that his ambition and hunger for fame created for his family.

While John was in Philadelphia at the Continental Congress, helping to forge a Revolutionary consensus among the delegates, Abigail remained home in Massachusetts, where she and the children were in danger not only from the nearby British Army — she and her son John Quincy even witnessed the battle of Bunker Hill firsthand — but also from the smallpox epidemic, which was running rampant through the army encampments. Her observations on the ground, combined with her correspondence with Catharine Macauley and Mercy Otis Warren (“the two most intellectually prominent female critics of British policy in the English-speaking world”), made her perhaps even more convinced than her husband that reconciliation with the British, in the walk-up to the Declaration of Independence, was, in Mr. Ellis’s words, “a naïve pipe dream.”

John Adams’s trips abroad as a diplomat would result in even longer marital separations. His departure in 1778 as a member of the American delegation to Paris charged with the all-important mission of persuading France to enter the war on the American side would result in an 18-month absence, and his return to France to negotiate a treaty with Britain ending the war would last, startlingly, nearly five years. Though John “accepted the domestic sacrifice as the price, albeit a high one, that must be paid to earn a permanent place of prominence in American history,” Mr. Ellis writes, Abigail found the separations almost insupportable.

It often took six months for one of John’s letters to reach her; some were lost at sea; and his time-consuming business correspondence often took precedence. As a result, Mr. Ellis writes, “any kind of ongoing conversation became impossible.” Depressed and angry, Abigail began to feel like a widow and at one point wondered out loud if her missing husband had “changed Hearts with some Laplander or made a voyage to a region that has chilled every Drop of your Blood.” Her emotional vulnerability and craving for affectionate attention would lead her into a brief literary dalliance with a ladies’ man named James Lovell, with whom she exchanged flirtatious letters loaded with sexual innuendo and fanciful expressions of endearment.

In 1784 Abigail joined her husband in Europe, and the couple would spend the next four years together “in a constant and unrelenting way that seemed almost designed to compensate for the previous separation.” Together in London and Paris — whose sumptuous luxury struck the two New Englanders as decadent and self-indulgent — they bonded anew, talking, bantering, arguing and commiserating “more routinely than they had ever done before in their married life.”

“They learned to love each other at an even deeper level than before,” Mr. Ellis writes, “and locked that love in place, and nothing they experienced for the rest of their lives ever threatened their mutual trust.”

Adams would need his wife’s unconditional love in the difficult years to come, as he succeeded the beloved Washington as president and found himself wading into the deadly swamp of partisan politics that had overtaken the fledgling American government, and facing the burdens of office that Abigail so aptly described as “the Whips and Scorpions, the Thorns without Roses, the dangers, anxieties and weight of Empire.”
