It must have been a heady week of rehearsals for the Ensemble ACJW, the performing arm of the Academy, a collaboration among Carnegie Hall, the Juilliard School and the Weill Music Institute. Simon Rattle, in town to conduct “Pelléas et Mélisande” at the Metropolitan Opera, took charge of the prodigiously talented ensemble, augmented this time by alumni of the program and a few guests.

Christian Tetzlaff, the violinist who is presenting an ambitious Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall this season — of which the ensemble’s Sunday evening concert at Zankel Hall was an installment — was on hand as both the soloist in the Ligeti Violin Concerto and the concertmaster in Richard Strauss’s “Metamorphosen.” And the soprano Barbara Hannigan, who gave an extraordinary performance as the Gepopo, the chief of the secret police, in Ligeti’s opera “Le Grande Macabre” at the New York Philharmonic last season, returned to reprise some of that music.

In addition, though Mr. Rattle was on the podium, the ensemble had three specialists to drill it in stylistic details. Jeffrey Milarsky, the conductor and percussionist, oversaw the two Ligeti works; Krista Bennion Feeney, the co-concertmaster of the Orchestra of St. Luke’s, guided the musicians through the Strauss; and the Baroque violinist Robert Mealy oversaw the colorful suite from Rameau’s “Boréades” that opened the concert.

The Rameau was a mixed success. Though the modern strings, woodwinds and brasses never achieved the lightness and transparency that have become necessary components of Baroque performance, the players brought such zest and vitality to Rameau’s dances — particularly the exotically modal, percussion-heavy contredanses at the end of the suite — that the textural issues were easily overlooked.

Even so, these players seemed more at home in the contemporary end of the repertory. The Ligeti Violin Concerto, an otherworldly five-movement work, moves between chaotic (yet often pianissimo) textures and nebulous clustery harmonies, to spare bittersweet lyricism. Mr. Tetzlaff, though best known for his patrician interpretations of Bach and Brahms, was entirely in his element here.

In the slow, mournful aria and eerily focused passacaglia he played with a rich, velvety tone and an irresistible sense of line while sacrificing nothing of Ligeti’s angularity. And in the long, wild cadenza at the end of the work, his playing was sheer, explosive virtuosity.

Virtuosity, tempered with zaniness, drives “Mysteries of the Macabre,” Elgar Howarth’s arrangement of Gepopo’s arias from “Le Grande Macabre.” Ms. Hannigan, Mr. Rattle and the players had fun with it: in one section Ms. Hannigan pushed Mr. Rattle away and conducted the orchestra; he stood aside for a minute then kicked her (literally) out of his space.

Elsewhere in the work, the orchestra is asked to vocalize — a modest demand, compared with sections of the Violin Concerto, where some of the players had to stand up and perform on ocarinas and what looked like pennywhistles. Amid all this Ms. Hannigan’s pinpoint vocalizations and fluid acting conveyed Ligeti’s parody of a secret-police chief with scalpel-edge sharpness.

Strauss’s elegy to German culture, composed in 1945, brought the concert to a sober conclusion, with Mr. Rattle drawing a warm, dolorous sound and a beautifully shaped reading from the orchestra’s 23 strings.
