OBSESSED with Champagne? I plead guilty. But you must understand, your Honor, it’s not just Champagne. I’m obsessed with almost all sparkling wines.

Yes, I know, that’s a big obsession. Sparkling wines are everywhere this time of the year, and they come from all over the wine-producing world, too. Just about every historic wine region has its own version.

But no country is so closely identified with sparkling wine as France is. Clearly, that’s because of the huge, foaming presence of Champagne at so many of life’s important events. The tradition of making fine sparkling wines goes beyond Champagne, however, reaching to all corners of the country and taking many different, sometimes surprising forms.

You want a delicate, slightly sweet, pinkish bubbly that can be absolutely delicious before or after a meal? Bugey Cerdon from eastern France is the one for you. Or a fragile, lightly sparkling white wine that is the ultimate in freshness? Maybe something perlant — just a whisper of bubbles — from Gaillac in the southwest. These are, perhaps, obscure examples, but many regions of France make more-conventional sparklers that resemble Champagne only in the sense that they can play similar roles.

Like Champagne, these sparklers are wonderfully versatile with food, yet may be delicious on their own. They are usually forcefully bubbly in the manner of Champagne, and therefore can gush forth on ceremonial and celebratory occasions. But in their aromas and flavors they are most definitely not Champagne. Instead, they offer distinctive personalities and characters.

Curious about the non-Champagne side of French sparkling wine, and true to its seasonal obligation, the wine panel recently tasted 20 bottles of Gallic bubbly. For the tasting Florence Fabricant and I were joined by Pascaline Lepeltier, wine director of Rouge Tomate restaurant in Midtown, and Victoria Levin, general manager of the Tangled Vine, a wine bar on the Upper West Side.

Over all, I was impressed with the quality and distinctiveness of these variations on the theme. The wines we liked best were lively and refreshing, with some degree of finesse. This, it turned out, was one of the chief differences between some of these wines and Champagne.

The elegance and polish that we associate with good Champagne was sometimes lacking. Some of these sparklers seemed rustic or, even worse, clumsy. We also rejected wines that lacked the tense sense of balance that energizes good sparkling wines.

This is a prerequisite, but it is not the only thing. “Sparkling wine is not only bubbles,” Pascaline said. “It’s also a wine.” In many of our favorites, we could sense what she called “the frankness of the grape.” This was especially clear in the three sparkling Vouvrays in our top 10, all of which expressed the character, in different ways, of the chenin blanc grape.

Our favorite, the Philippe Foreau brut, was complex and savory, dry yet with the telltale touch of honey that to me always indicates chenin blanc. The Champalou brut, our No. 8 bottle, was pure and fresh, with flavors of apples and honeysuckle.

As with most of our favorites, these were made using the same method as Champagne, in which the grapes are fermented into still wines and then bottled. A second fermentation is then induced in the bottle, which produces carbon dioxide that, unable to escape, carbonates the wine.

By contrast, the third sparkling Vouvray, the 2005 Huët Pétillant, was made differently, bottled part way through the first fermentation rather than after it had completed fermentation. As it finishes its single fermentation in the bottle, a smaller amount of carbon dioxide is released, producing a pétillant wine, sparkling but with a gentler level of carbonation. Indeed, the ’05 Huët is light and delicate, yet pure and fresh, with a subtle touch of honey.

Among our top 10 we had one more wine from the Loire Valley, our No. 5 bottle, the Langlois-Château Crémant de Loire. It is only 60 percent chenin blanc, with the rest chardonnay and cabernet franc, but the chenin still shines through in this fresh, vibrant wine.

The crémant designation is used in much of France to indicate wines made in what used to be called the Champagne method. All six of our other favorites, two from Burgundy and four from Alsace, were crémants. Our No. 2 bottle, the Parigot Crémant de Bourgogne, was a tangy, minerally blanc de blancs, made of chardonnay and aligoté, while our No. 10 bottle, the earthy, toasty Crémant de Bourgogne from Jean-Louis Moissenet-Bonnard, was made of pinot noir.
