CAMPION PLATT, an architect known for designing swanky spaces like Manhattan’s MercBar, renovated the Upper West Side town house owned by his publicist, R. Couri Hay, this year. And as a special favor, later this week he plans to decorate Mr. Hay’s Christmas tree for him. There will be lavender tinsel, one garland of signed Warhol dollar bills and another made from celebrity photographs Mr. Hay snipped from magazines during the year — images of his “favorite scandals and beauties,” Mr. Platt said, including Tiger Woods, Lindsay Lohan and Carla Bruni. A video installation showing moody black-and-white Manhattan holiday images, which is also Mr. Platt’s firm’s Christmas greeting, will be playing continuously on Mr. Hay’s flat-screen television. To be sure, Mr. Platt is doing a bit of cross-pollinating by planting his name on Mr. Hay’s festivities, but he is also making sure that the decorations for Mr. Hay’s annual Christmas party are on a par with the interior architecture.

For those who regularly avail themselves of the services of decorators and designers, the holiday decorations may be part of the service contract. In some cases, like Mr. Platt’s efforts for Mr. Hay, it’s brand protection for the designers, as well as an assist to a friend. That is why Rick Garofalo performed a holiday zhoosh in the Chelsea studio of his friend and client Penelope Zabolotney, helping prep “her cocoon of pale,” as Mr. Garofalo described the taupe-and-white space he decorated for Ms. Zabolotney, a design director at Coach, for the all-white Christmas party she gives every December. There was a fluffy white artificial tree pocked with silvery ornaments, and cylindrical vases filled with white feathers and calla lilies. For the party last year, Mr. Garofalo even made white cocktails to match.

For clients with three or four homes, what many would consider a holiday perk may be more of a necessity. Consider the needs of a European couple with a young family — 4-year-old twin boys — who live abroad but maintain a house in Connecticut and a penthouse on the Upper East Side, which they like to visit at Christmas. For six years, their decorator, Scott Salvator, has shouldered the Manhattan portion of the holiday preparations for them, ordering the 12-foot Douglas fir, the ropes of pine garlands, the Noble pine wreaths. Mr. Salvator also arranges for the building’s superintendent and the housekeeper to help unearth the family of nutcrackers that he bought, and the ribbons and ornaments he has collected, from the storage bin in the basement, so that he and his associates can swag the place like a Victorian engraving, a task he completed last Saturday, just hours before the family arrived. (The tree is due Thursday.)

“This just goes to the notion that an interior designer is a full-service provider,” Mr. Salvator said. “As opposed to being someone who just shops. You are creating a lifestyle.”

On Friday, he spent seven hours in Manhattan’s flower district on 28th Street, searching for “a few things to fill in,” he said. He spent Saturday fluffing the penthouse. A holiday fully designed by this decorator might cost anywhere from $5,000 to $50,000 — at first, the cost of decorating the penthouse for the holidays was in the tens of thousands while Mr. Salvator was still accumulating the elements — but he would rather you didn’t call him. His holiday fluffing is meted out to just two very special clients, neither of whom live in New York, and it wears him out.

He recalled one particularly arduous Christmas he orchestrated in the Hamptons: the long drive out in a painter’s van on Dec. 24, when he crouched in the back with a hair dryer aimed at the still-wet faux-marble top of a wall console a carpenter was waiting to install. When Mr. Salvator and his partner, Michael Zabriskie, arrived, they parked a few streets away from the house, in case the objects of all this fluffing — the chief executive “of a major corporation” and his family — arrived and saw the van.

“We trimmed the tree, put the logs in the fire and candles everywhere, throughout which time Michael was eating, without meaning to, all the Christmas cookies the housekeeper had prepared, so she had to make more,” Mr. Salvator said.

At dusk, “as the family came in the front door, we snuck out the back, walking through other people’s properties to find our van. We didn’t want the family to see us and feel guilty that we were there till the last hour. It’s like good dancing — the trick is to not make it look hard.”
