CAMBRIDGE, MA--(Marketwire - January 3, 2011) -   Wouldn't it be nice to cruise through life in a Nissan JUKE™? We think so, which is why SCVNGR -- the social game all about going places, doing challenges and earning rewards -- has partnered with Nissan to build the "Juke The City" challenge. Starting January 3, anyone living in Chicago, Los Angeles, New York or San Francisco can complete challenges at select places with SCVNGR Rewards for the chance to win a Nissan JUKE™ (and unlock other place-specific rewards along the way).
"Nissan products are innovative, bold, stylish and fun!" said Jon Brancheau, Vice President Nissan Marketing, Nissan North America, Inc. "The new 2011 Nissan JUKE™ shakes things up, so we're turning to SCVNGR to shake things up on the marketing end by building into their game layer a unique and entertaining set of location-based challenges that can lead to a host of great rewards."
By playing SCVNGR, anyone can earn instant rewards -- like cameras and iPods -- and become eligible for the grand prize by visiting the 20 locations throughout each city, trying new things and completing culture-themed challenges. Some of the fun and social challenges on SCVNGR that can get you rewards include:
"Juke Box": Earn three points just by perusing the records on a juke box and naming the song that would top the charts on your driving playlist.
"Try Everything": Earn two points for serving up plates (tapas style) at a restaurant and snapping a photo of the table.
"Think Small": Earn three points for snapping a 1cm portion of a mural at one of the local places.
"We're revved-up to be working with Nissan to create challenges that are fun, engaging and potentially very profitable for consumers," said Chris Mahl, SVP & Chief Brand Alchemist at SCVNGR. "Challenges at locations with earned rewards extend brands in a very powerful way."
"SCVNGR delivers phenomenal game-generated engagement that can successfully reach multicultural consumers," said Danielle Austen, Managing Partner at Team Ignition, an agency targeting Hispanics, African Americans and Asian Americans that has partnered with Dieste for this initiative. "Location-based apps are taking off. SCVNGR's social game engine provides a fantastic, new approach for consumers to engage and interact with the Nissan brand."
If you think you have what it takes to win the new Nissan JUKE™, start now by downloading the SCVNGR app for iPhone or Android. The Nissan JUKE™ has an I-CON system that allows for 3 driving modes: Normal, Sport and Eco. Choose your favorite mode and do fun challenges on SCVNGR at underground record stores, cool coffee shops, vintage clothing boutiques, and the best-kept secret restaurants. At each place you can earn points to unlock rewards and extra chances to win the Nissan Juke™. For more information about the "Juke The City" challenge, please visit: www.jukethecity.com
About SCVNGR
SCVNGR is a game. Playing is simple: Go places. Have fun and share with your friends. Check-in, snap pics, do the social check-in or try a challenge! Everywhere you go, you'll earn points and start unlocking real-world rewards at over 12,000 locations (think free ice cream!). SCVNGR makes it easy to share where you are and what you're up to with your friends on SCVNGR, Facebook and Twitter. Start playing SCVNGR by downloading our free iPhone & Android app. SCVNGR is funded by Google Ventures and Highland Capital Partners. Visit www.scvngr.com to learn more.
About Nissan North America
In North America, Nissan's operations include automotive styling, engineering, consumer and corporate financing, sales and marketing, distribution and manufacturing. Nissan is dedicated to improving the environment under the Nissan Green Program 2010 and has been recognized as a 2010 ENERGY STAR® Partner of the Year by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. More information on Nissan in North America and the complete line of Nissan and Infiniti vehicles can be found online at www.NissanUSA.com and www.InfinitiUSA.com.
