SEATTLE, WA--(Marketwire - January 4, 2011) - HQ Sustainable Maritime Industries, Inc. (NYSE Amex: HQS) ("HQS" or the "Company"), a leading producer of functional, sustainable Tilapia biomass, including fish and personal healthcare products, today announced Norbert Sporns, President and Chief Executive Officer, will present at the 13th Annual ICR XChange Conference on Thursday, January 13, 2011 at 8:50 a.m. PT in Dana Point, CA.
The audio portion of the presentation will be webcast live, and a replay will be available until Thursday, January 27, 2011 on the investor relations section of HQ Sustainable Maritime's website at http://www.hqfish.com/.
About HQ Sustainable Maritime Industries, Inc.
HQ Sustainable Maritime Industries, Inc. is a leader in the production and marketing of functional, sustainable, biomass products focused on Tilapia aquaculture through vertically integrated operations. HQS practices cooperative farming of sustainable aquaculture, using all-natural enriched feeds. The Company produces and sells wholesale feed products as well as retail focused nutraceutical and health products including Omojo branded health products through direct and franchise sales in China and is expanding its product line for the American market. Additionally, the Company produces and sells Lillian's Healthy Gourmet Meals and other fish products in the United States and has expanded these value added seafood products to include its "Oudun" line of products in China, catering to high-end retail stores. The Company conducts fish processing, production and sales with operations based in the island province of Hainan, in the South China Sea. The Company holds HACCP and GMP certification from the U.S. FDA and the EU Code assignment of quality, permitting its products to be sold in these international markets. It has also achieved the ISO 9001 quality management system standards certification and the ISO 22000 certification for quality in food safety. The Aquaculture Certification Council, Inc. certified that HQS tilapia farming and processing standards met Best Aquaculture Practices and Moody International Certification Ltd. The Company's certified co-op farming and processing are in conformity with the new Global G.A.P., the Global Partnership for Good Agriculture Practice, standards for Tilapia. The Chinese government gave organic certification to the Company's tilapia processing, production, labeling, marketing and management system. A new Feed Mill has been completed producing principally Tilapia feed and is capable of 100,000 MT annual production. In addition to headquarters in Seattle, HQ has operational offices in Wenchang, Hainan and produces Lillian's Healthy Gourmet meals in its Seattle affiliate production facility. The Company's website is: http://www.hqfish.com.
Safe Harbor Statement
Certain statements in this press release that are not historical facts are "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such statements may be identified by the use of words such as "anticipate," "believe," "expect," "future," "may," "will," "would," "should," "plan," "projected," "intend," and similar expressions. Such forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of HQ Sustainable Maritime Industries, Inc. to be materially different from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. The Company's future operating results are dependent upon many factors, including but not limited to the Company's ability to: (i) obtain sufficient capital or a strategic business arrangement to fund its expansion plans; (ii) build the management and human resources and infrastructure necessary to support the growth of its business; (iii) competitive factors and developments beyond the Company's control; and (iv) other risk factors discussed in the Company's periodic filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which are available for review at www.sec.gov under "Search for Company Filings."
