OTTAWA — It seems the “lost generation” isn’t so lost after all in terms of looking toward retirement.

A survey released Tuesday shows most members of Generation X — between that ages of 30 and 44 — have a clear vision of what their retirement will be like.

Investors Group, which commissioned the survey, said the 58% of respondents of this age group who answered this way “compares favourably” to results of an earlier poll done of baby boomers, of which 66% had a specific vision of their retirements.

The survey showed other retirement-related aspects for Gen Xers aren’t so different from their older cohorts, for which retirement is a pending reality among many.

For example, 60% of Gen Xers expect retirement to be an exciting time of their lives, similar to the proportion of boomers who feel this way.

As well, 61% of Gen Xers in this survey said they have registered retirement savings plans (RRSPs), and 85% said they’ll be putting the same amount of money or more into them in the upcoming tax year. The corresponding results for boomers on this question were 62 and 79%, respectively.

A similar amount of Gen Xers to boomers — about 40% — also said they have opened up tax-free savings accounts.

“Gen X and boomers may have some differences, but it appears the apple doesn’t fall far from the tree in financial planning,” said Debbie Ammeter, vice-president for advanced financial planning of Investors Group. “Gen Xers share remarkably similar dreams and hopes especially when it comes to their vision of retirement and how they are going to get there.”

Similar to boomers, about four in 10 Gen Xers said they would maintain some kind of reduced work schedule in retirement.

A separate survey from Scotiabank, also released Tuesday, showed most Canadians plan on working in retirement. Most cited to need to stay mentally or socially active as the reasons, but almost 40% cited financial necessity.

There was at least one area of difference between these generations that showed up in the Investors Group Survey. Just 27% of Gen Xers said boomers had an exceptional or positive impact of society, politics and the economy. Most — 64% — rated their elders’ overall impact as positive and negative.

Among boomers, 45% rated their generation’s impact on various aspects of society as overwhelmingly positive.

The results were based on a online survey, conducted by Harris/Decima, of 2,031 Canadians over the age of 18 between Oct. 28 and Nov. 9. The results were weighted to reflect the makeup of the population, which the survey’s creators said made any margin of error non-applicable.

Postmedia News

Twitter.com/derekabma

© Copyright (c) National Post


Read more: http://www.ottawacitizen.com/business/Xers+boomers+have+similar+retirement+ideas+survey/4056786/story.html#ixzz1mxS8bF00