As my colleagues Waqar Gillani and Carlotta Gall report from Pakistan, a police officer suspected of killing a prominent secular politician on Tuesday was showered with rose petals by Islamist lawyers on his way in to court in Islamabad on Wednesday.

Photographs and video show that the suspected assassin, Malik Mumtaz Qadri, was draped in a garland of flowers by supporters before he entered the court, and emerged from the hearing still wearing it.

Immediately after the killing, Mr. Qadri reportedly confessed to fellow police officers that he shot Salman Taseer, the governor of Punjab Province, at close range 14 times because of the politician’s outspoken support for a Christian woman convicted of violating Pakistan’s strict blasphemy law.

A video report by Lindsey Hilsum of Britain’s Channel 4 News shows that the police officers who led the suspected killer from the court, some of them smiling, allowed him to stand on the rear of an armored vehicle and lead the crowd in a chant of: “In the service of the Prophet, death is acceptable!”

Ms. Hilsum’s report also includes footage of one young lawyer promising to represent Mr. Qadri for free.

Pakistan’s Express Tribune reported that more than 500 religious leaders from what Reuters called “a relatively moderate school of Islam in Pakistan” issued a statement forbidding their followers from mourning for the murdered governor. “No Muslim should attend the funeral or even try to pray for Salman Taseer or even express any kind of regret or sympathy over the incident,” the scholars declared. They added: “We pay rich tributes and salute the bravery, valor and faith of Mumtaz Qadri.”

Later in the day, Reuters reported:

However, in a sign of how confusing Pakistan’s politics can be, pro-Taliban cleric Tahir Mehmood Ashrafi condemned the killing of Taseer, saying the law was man-made and not divine. “It is the product of extremism and fanaticism which is damaging for an Islamic society,” said Ashrafi. He said the clerics’ association which he heads has 5,000 members.

In an interview shortly before his death, Mr. Taseer had made a similar observation, calling the country’s blasphemy law “a man-made law, not a God-made one.”
