THE world's newest stock exchange is set to open for trade this week in communist Laos, which hopes its cautious embrace of global capitalism will spur development of south-east Asia's smallest economy.
It is the latest experiment in free-wheeling finance for a country that is officially socialist but in reality began tiptoeing away from a Soviet-style command economic system in the 1980s with free-market reforms.
The landlocked former French colony of about 6 million people is seeking to reduce its dependency on agriculture and foreign aid, helped by growing exports of minerals and electricity from hydropower generation.
Advertisement: Story continues below
It is no coincidence that one of the two companies that will initially be listed on the Lao Securities Exchange when it opens for trade tomorrow is a spin-off of state-run energy giant Electricite du Laos.
The chairman of the Lao Securities Exchange (LSX), Dethphouvang Moularat, is confident that the opening will be a milestone for the impoverished nation, where the majority of people still live on less than $2 a day.
''It will help the economy a lot,'' he said in an interview at the stock market's modern, glass-fronted headquarters in the capital Vientiane.
He said the sharemarket would complement an existing foreign exchange market, giving companies access to vital capital to expand.
''The stock market will be an expressway for funds,'' said Mr Dethphouvang, who expects strong interest among investors and private companies looking to drum up cash.
While Laos has been a one-party state since 1975, it has followed a similar path as China and Vietnam to a ''socialist market economy'', combining central planning with market-oriented reforms.
In June 2009, US President Barack Obama declared Laos had ''ceased to be a Marxist-Leninist country'' and removed it from a trade blacklist, citing its commitment to opening up its markets.
Laos sought technical and financial support for its exchange from South Korea, whose own sharemarket operator has a 49 per cent stake in the LSX.