Shares of takeover target Consol. Thompson (CLM-T) soared past the offer price Wednesday as investors bet on a potential bidding war amid rapidly rising demand and shrinking supply for iron ore.

Consolidated Thompson shares hit an all-time high of $17.95 on the Toronto Stock Exchange early Wednesday before closing at $17.35, still above the $17.25 offer tabled late Tuesday by Cleveland-based Cliffs Natural (CLF-N) which is a 30-per-cent premium from its closing price on Monday.

Investors speculated other offers may now surface for the Montreal-based miner, in an echo of the takeover battle that has been playing out for months for Baffinland Iron Mines Corp. and its undeveloped Mary River iron ore project in Canada’s high Arctic.

Iron ore is becoming a hot commodity as rapid industrialization in countries such as China and India boosts demand for the raw material amid fears of diminishing supply. Those concerns were stoked Wednesday by reports that India’s top iron-ore-producing state is considering banning iron ore exports. Steel makers are also trying to reduce their reliance on the three large iron ore suppliers – Vale SA, Rio Tinto PLC and BHP Billiton Ltd. – which largely control pricing.

Sources say a handful of other miners were interested in buying Consolidated Thompson before Cliffs presented its $4.7-billion proposal. (The total value is $4.9-billion, including debt.)

Consolidated Thompson’s board voted unanimously in favour of Cliffs’ offer after a “rigorous process,” said Brian Tobin, the company’s executive chairman, president and chief executive officer.

“Might there be someone else interested? There is a provision for a superior bid,” Mr. Tobin said in an interview.

However, he said the company has “a high level of comfort” that the Cliffs’ offer “properly values this company at this time in its life, and represents a full and fair value.”

Other players named by analysts as potential alternative bidders for Consolidated Thompson include foreign buyers such as Rio Tinto, ArcelorMittal – already involved in the battle for Baffinland – Xtrata PLC and Tata Steel, as well as Canadian mining giant Teck Resources Ltd.

Still, many saw Cliffs’ bid as the most attractive, given the high premium, as well as the operating synergies. Cliffs operates the Wabush mine in Newfoundland and Labrador, which is near Consolidated Thompson’s operations.

“We believe that there is a high likelihood that Cliffs’ offer will prevail,” Raymond James Ltd. analyst Adam Low said in a note.

Mr. Tobin, the former federal industry minister and Newfoundland premier, believes Cliffs’ proposed offer should have no trouble passing required regulatory hurdles with Investment Canada and the Canadian Competition Act because of the company’s long operating history in the country.

“My view is Cliffs is making a big bet on Canada, on North America, and this probably also bodes well for the long-term future of Wabush because I think you’ll see a longer-term commitment,” Mr. Tobin said.

He noted Consolidated Thompson tried as recently as 2009 to buy Wabush from Cliffs, but the offer failed as a result of a right-of-first-refusal agreement. In October, 2009, Cliffs used that right to buy U.S. Steel’s 44.6-per-cent interest in the operation and ArcelorMittal’s 28.6-per-cent stake.
