The upfront tax refund generated by RRSPs may blind some investors to the merits of the non-refund-generating TFSA, says a report issued today by CIBC Wealth’s vice president of tax and estate planning, Jamie Golombek.

As we noted in Wednesday’s column in the paper, the Tax Free Savings Account may be a better retirement savings vehicle than RRSPs for younger workers still in low tax brackets, or for low-income seniors who may find RRIF withdrawals jeopardizing their Guaranteed Income Supplement and other means tested benefits. TFSAs are also friendly for higher income seniors who are in range of having their OAS benefits clawed back.

Golombek agrees that in the best of all worlds, investors should do both but when forced to choose just one or the other, more often than not his analysis finds the TFSA the better choice.

Mathematically, TFSAs & RRSPs are usually equivalent

Mathematically, he shows how all things being equal — particularly the tax bracket you’re in when contributing to these plans and the tax bracket you’re in during retirement — the RRSP and TFSA are equal. Thus, in the example shown in the chart here he shows how $5,000 invested in either plan ultimately nets you $7,960 in cash after 20 years (growing at 5% for those with a 40% marginal tax rate.)

The math is tricky but the RRSP grows to $13,266 but gets taxed at withdrawal time by $5,306, netting $7,960. With the TFSA, the lack of the upfront tax refund means that effectively $3,000 grows to $7,960 over the 20 years but since it doesn’t get taxed on withdrawal, the saver is now exactly where the RRSP investor is after the taxed RRIF withdrawal.

Refunds are not a “windfall” but have future tax liability

This comparison should motivate those “blinded by the refund” to view the refund in a different light. The RRSP-generated tax refund should not be considered a “windfall,” Golombek observes, but rather “the present value of the future tax payment that will have to be made on the ultimate RRSP withdrawal.”

If you’re always in the same tax bracket during and after your working years, the TFSA and RRSP are almost identical. If you expect to be in a lower tax bracket after retirement, then you may want to give the nod to RRSPs, Golombek says.  He shows an example [shown below] where the RRSP generates $10,613 after tax versus just $7,960 for the TFSA.

Pension splitting may argue for RRSPs

However, if the reverse is true and you expect to be in a higher tax bracket in retirement than when working, then the numbers flip around and the TFSA nets you $10,613 after tax versus just $7,960 for the RRSP. You can see why people call the TFSA the mirror-image of the RRSP! As my Wednesday column suggested, if only one half of a couple is in a good corporate pension plan, then pension splitting may lower both spouses’ tax brackets in retirement, which favors the RRSP/RRIF combo.

OAS and GIS thresholds may tilt decision to TFSAs

On the other hand, if you worry about losing GIS or having your OAS benefits clawed back, the TFSA will do less damage. Golombek says the GIS for a single senior is worth $7,940 and extra income starts to erode qualification at $6,291 and negates all GIS benefits at $22,172.

Similarly, OAS is worth $6,291 a year with clawbacks beginning with $32,961 of income, while $76,541 of annual income will result in all your OAS benefits being clawed back.

Personally, I intend to max out on both the TFSA and RRSP and will take my chances losing some or all of the OAS. But many people don’t have much RRSP room anyway: those making little income, those with generous employer pensions and anyone past age 71. In all those cases, the annual $5,000 TFSA contribution should be a no-brainer as long as they can come up with the cash.

