Before the iPhone, Motorola's RAZR was the world's must-have handset. But the company failed to come up with a successor and has been bleeding market share ever since. 

Now, Motorola Mobility (MMI) is back. After being lost in the woods for a few years, this former leader has found its way.

By last summer, Motorola clung to just a 3% sliver of the global mobile phone market and had slipped into 8th place. But the tide began to turn shortly thereafter -- and I am expecting a big comeback in 2011. 

Shut out of the iPhone (at least until recently), Verizon Wireless has spent over $100 million in a major marketing blitz for the rival Motorola Droid. 

As the key recipient of that advertising push, Motorola is now shipping over 3 million phones per month. And that demand has translated into dramatic bottom-line improvements. 

How dramatic? Last quarter, operating income in the mobile devices division swung from a steep $183 million loss to a $3 million gain. 

There are worries that with the iPhone coming to Verizon, Motorola's biggest carrier partner will now have split loyalties. That's a valid concern, but it's probably overblown. 

And it will be offset by the fact that AT&T (stripped of its iPhone monopoly) will likely be devoting more shelf space to Android phones.

Expect to see the sleek new Motorola Atrix 4G on the AT&T network within the next 3 months. Meanwhile, Motorola will still be a star player on team Verizon. 

In fact, the first phone to access Verizon's new lightning-fast 4G LTE network will be Motorola's Droid Bionic, which took home the top award in the CES smartphone category. 

In other words, consumers looking to ride the 4G wave at either of the nation's two biggest wireless carriers have this choice: Motorola or Motorola. 

By itself, this makes the new Motorola Mobility (which was just carved out into a standalone company a few weeks ago), worth a closer look. But let's not forget the real reason you're reading this -- tablets. 

Motorola's Xoom hasn't even hit the market yet, but it has already won over many skeptics and could pose an immediate threat to the iPad. Xoom will be the first in the field to run the tablet-optimized Android 3.0 operating system (aka honeycomb). 

The upscale 4G device will feature a high-definition camcorder, HDMI output, 32 GB of on-board memory, and 2 GHz of processing muscle. 

The Xoom can also become its own mobile hotspot, with built-in connections for up to 5 additional WiFi-enabled devices. 

And users will have access to thousands of apps and millions of Google eBooks. In many regards, the engineers at Motorola didn't just match the iPad, they went a step beyond -- with higher display resolution and other perks. 

But don't just take my word for it. The Xoom didn't just take home the best tablet award among the 80 or so entries in Las Vegas, it also won the coveted "Best of CES" trophy. 

Of course, you can expect Apple to counter with a second-generation product before too long. 

But for now, the Xoom appears to be best-in-class. And based on what I'm hearing from internal suppliers, the company has already ordered 800,000 units -- possibly more. 

Motorola is launching a disruptive new product into what is itself a disruptive market. This has all the makings of a powerful catalyst, and it won't be long before we see an impact.

Action to Take --> To avoid any confusion, Motorola recently reorganized and split into two separate companies. Smartphones, tablets and other consumer devices are now the exclusive domain of Motorola Mobility (MMI), while Motorola Solutions ( MSI) caters primarily to business and government customers. 

I am interested in MMI, whose talented development team has been busy, unveiling 22 smartphones last year. And those efforts are bearing fruit. 

Sales jumped 13% last quarter, the first year-over-year increase since 2006. The company also ended the quarter with a cash stockpile of $9.0 billion. And with three blockbuster products in the queue, I think the stock is poised for big gains. 
