Retail continued to serve as a destination for buyers ahead of trading on Wednesday, with retailers like J.C. Penney Company Inc (JCP) closed higher for a third day in a row. Up more than 3% were both Amazon.Com Inc (AMZN) and Macy's Inc (M). Both stocks are trading above their 200-day moving averages.

Signs of profit-taking in the energy patch remain on the horizon, with shares of Halliburton Co (HAL) pulling back by well over 2% and Transocean Ltd (RIG) closing lower for a third day in a row. Note that neither stock is yet in oversold territory.

Here are 7 Stocks You Need to Know for Wednesday.

Reporting quarterly earnings Wednesday morning before the market opens is Coca-Cola Co (KO). Shares of KO had pulled back for four consecutive trading days before bouncing modestly on Tuesday.

Strength in retail stocks helped send shares of  Family Dollar Stores Inc (FDO) up by more than 5% in Tuesday's trading. The rally brings the stock back above its 200-day moving average.

Plunging by nearly 3% after becoming overbought below the 200-day moving average on Tuesday were shares of Avon Products Inc (AVP).

NVIDIA Corporation (NVDA) (below) pulled back for a second day in a row ahead of trading on Wednesday.

The stock was down nearly 3% and has closed lower for three out of the past four trading days.

Cisco Systems Inc (CSCO) (below) is scheduled to report quarterly earnings after the bell on Wednesday.

Shares of the stock were pulling back for a second day on Tuesday, following Cisco's climb into overbought territory below the 200-day moving average.

After closing higher for six consecutive trading days and becoming overbought above the 200-day moving average, shares of Yahoo! Inc (YHOO) (below) pulled back by more than 1%.

Yahoo! had been moving higher in the wake of the stock's last oversold close in late January.

Whole Foods Market Inc (WFMI) failed to hold on to intraday highs in trading on Tuesday. The stock has been rangebound since mid-January, oscillating between 54 and 51 cents. The company is scheduled to report quarterly earnings after the market closes on Wednesday.

With 16 backtested strategies for trading bull markets, bear markets and sideways markets, Short Term Trading Strategies That Work by Larry Connors and Cesar Alvarez may be the most important trading book you read this year. Click here to order your copy of Short Term Trading Strategies That Work today.

David Penn is Editor in Chief of TradingMarkets.com