JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – High-flying record R14,3-billion profit Kumba Iron Ore foresees year-end closure to its arbitration and litigation battles.

After announcing a 101% cash-from-operations increase to R25,6-billion and a generous cash dividend that will see its black economic-empowerment partners in an unencumbered R5-billion ownership position, Kumba CEO Chris Griffith told Mining Weekly Online in a video interview that the company was hoping for arbitration resolution by the end of 2011.

“We are particularly proud of the substantial cash – R3,6-billion - that we returned to our black economically empowered shareholders,” said Griffith.

Export sales volumes increased by 6% to 36,1-million tons and the on-time and on-budget Kolomela project poised to provide a 2012 tailwind.

Three arbitrators have been appointed to determine whether Kumba’s cost-plus-3% contract mining agreement has lapsed or remains in place and Kumba wants the High Court to provide a declarator on multiple ownership of undivided rights, as well as overturn the government decision to grant Imperial Crown Trading a prospecting right, as well as.

Sishen Iron Ore Company to which the black-controlled JSE-listed Exxaro is linked, is also appealing against the Department of Mineral Resources’s (DMR’s) rejection of its May 2009 mining right application.

“We disagree with the way in which the DMR has acted in this regard as it is obliged to be an unbiased regulator,” says Griffith.

The DMR denies acting in a biased manner.

“We will continue to protect the interests of our shareholders and the board remains steadfast to have this matter resolved in court. We believe that it is good for the South African mining industry, for foreign investment and for Kumba that these issues are tested in a court of law,” Griffith adds.

Griffith puts Kumba’s top-drawer “team-effort” performance down to stronger export prices, an increase in export sales volumes and cost containment through improved operational efficiencies.

Revenue increased by 65% to R38,7-billion and Sishen mine production up 5% to 41,3-million tons.

All operations have water-use licences and the company is exceeding the Revised Mining Charter targets with 46,8% of the management team from the historically disadvantaged group.

Some 14,4% employees are women and blacks in management increased to 31,75%.

Total skills development spend was 7,4% of salary bill, well ahead of the 5%-by-2014 stipulation and cost savings of R1,9-billion contributed to operating profit.

Griffith expects production to remain stable during 2011, with the next stage of growth coming from Kolomela.

Domestic sales volumes remain dependent on the offtake requirements from ArcelorMittal, which now appears to want iron-ore from the new Phoenix project.

China’s crude steel production is expected to grow between 5% and 10% during 2011.

Griffith sees limited room for growth in Chinese domestic iron-ore production, supporting demand for seaborne imports.

With no new major iron-ore projects coming on line in the near future, he expects the supply-demand balance to remain tight in 2011, which in turn should support prices, currently at $160/t.

The company remains focused on squeezing full value out of its current operations rather than venturing elsewhere and taking steps to lessen the adverse effects of the strong rand, the mining royalty and operational cost pressures.

Excluding the margin earned from providing a shipping service to customers, the group’s mining operating margin increased from 61% in 2009 to 69%.

Kumba paid R7-billion in taxes, the mining royalty effective from March cost R1,4 billion, and the 13% stronger rand cut revenues by R4,9-billion.

Operating expenses, excluding the royalty expense, increased by 16% to R12,2-billion.

Capital expenditure of R4,7-billion was incurred, of which R1,6-billion was to maintain operations and R2,4-billion to expand operations.

Kumba is sitting on a cash pile of R1,7-billion compared with being in a R3-billion net debt position at the end of 2009.