CB Richard Ellis announced the appointment of Brandi Dees as vice president, Jon Lee as first vice president and Rich Pancioli as senior vice president.

Brandi McDonald has joined Newmark Knight Frank in Houston as a managing principal.

Locke Lord Bissell & Liddell has named three Houston partners to its 2011 board of directors. Stephanie Donaho, head of the firm's trusts and estates section, has been re-elected as co-chair. Robert Miller, chair of the public law and governmental affairs group, who also offices in Austin, has been re-elected to the board. Brent Benoit, who focuses his practice on securities litigation, complex commercial litigation and handling internal and governmental investigations, has become a new board member.

Jeff Wright, vice president, sales, with WebbMason, has been elected president of the Houston Production Managers Association.

Stewart Hofferhas joined Hicks Thomas as a partner in the firm's Houston office. Hoffer represents clients in complex business litigation and employment matters.

Sean Mullerhas joined Weaver as a partner in its tax and strategic business services division.

Robyn R. DragoandTimothy B. Miller have joined Texas Capital Bank as senior vice presidents in the commercial banking group.

Texas Gulf Bank announced changes in its executive team: Richard W. Jochetzhas been named president, Jimmy Brownretains the role of chief executive officer, andRobert G. Greer has been named chairman of the board.

Canidium, a provider of sales performance and incentive compensation management services, has namedDavid Debbsto the position of managing director and Scott Williamsonto vice president of sales.

CDC Houston, a subsidiary of Coventry Development Corp. of New York, announced the appointment of two managers from within the Coventry organization to the Springwoods Village development team:Darryl Jones as development manager andLeo Denslow as construction manager.

Huntsman Corp.announced the appointment of Stu Monteith as president of its performance products division.

Chris Porchhas been named chief executive officer of RecycleMatch, an online B2B marketplace for business recycling and waste diversion.

Robert Fosshas been appointed president and chief executive officer of NorTex Gas Storage Co.

Sparkhound announced the following new employees in its Houston office: Vicki Johnson is director of business development; Michael Sheppard is a senior business consultant; and Marcus Grant is a core infrastructure consultant.

Barbara Zlatnik with the International Facility Management Association will serve as president of the board of directors of the Houston Society of Association Executives for 2011.

The Greater Tomball Area Chamber of Commerce announced new members to its 2011 board of directors: Darlene Blair, assistant superintendent Tomball ISD; Lamar Casparis, vice chair, Fitts, Roberts & Co.; and Chris O'Rourke, owner of Outback Western Wear.

Gin Kappler-Peeler has joined the design firm Perkins+Will as senior project manager for its Houston location.

The Houston office of Chamberlain Hrdlicka announced the addition of PaulMasters and Heather Pesikoff as senior counsel. Masters focuses his practice on general business and tax advice. Pesikoff specializes in tax law.

Mattress Firm announced the promotion of Jason Goodman to director of multichannel business development, a new role, and the return of founder Paul Stork as manager of franchising.

Rita Kirkuphas been appointed executive director of Girls Incorporated of Greater Houston.

Mark Millerhas joined Sharewell as president of MWD (measurement while drilling), andMark Frenzelhas joined the Houston-based directional services company as director of business development.

Ryan Brookshas joined the Drake Co. as an account executive. Brooks has a background in the packaging and display industry.

Matt Todd has been elevated to equity partner at the intellectual property law firm of Novak Druce + Quigg.

Grant Thornton announced that effective Aug. 1, Michael Bennett will serve as the new Houston office managing partner, succeeding the retiring Justin Gannon.

UHY Advisors announced the following appointments. Vicky Gregorcyk was named the department head of enterprise risk advisory services. Casey Ballard was hired as senior manager in the forensic litigation and valuation services department. Robert Goodfriend and Liza Monroe were hired as senior managers in the tax department.

Dan Piettehas been appointed chief executive officer of Object Reservoir, a provider of reservoir analysis services to the global exploration and production industry.

Sherry Burtonhas been named marketing manager for The Woodlands Mall.

Pennebaker, a branding and marketing communications agency, announced the addition of Richard Grasshoff as director of digital media and the promotion of Halina Dodd to principal.

Brett Miles has joined Moody Rambin's investment services group, where he will focus on representing sellers and buyers of retail and office properties.

Gensler announced the promotion of regional marketing directorEllyn Wulfeto senior associate. Promoted to associate are: Kristy Emmrich; Kimberly Hickson; Terry Newell; Fernando Ortega; Lisa Pope Westerman; Suzanne Schreider; Luke Scott; and Jeannie Wu• .

The following attorneys have joined Kane Russell Coleman & Logan as directors: Danny Guerra, practicing in the litigation section; Michael Ridulfo, practicing in the insolvency and creditor rights and litigation sections; and Marcy Rothman,practicing in the litigation section.

Will Bradleyhas joined Read King Commercial Real Estate as vice president of leasing.

The Chronicle lists appointments to executive-level positions in Houston. Send announcements to katherine.feser@chron.com.