BAGHDAD (AFP) – More than nine months after March 7 elections resulted in a prolonged political deadlock in Iraq, Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki on Monday presented part of his new government to parliament.
An MP close to Maliki said the line-up includes new chiefs for Iraq's oil and finance ministries while foreign affairs is to keep its current head.
Parliament speaker Osama al-Nujaifi said that Iraqi lawmakers will vote Tuesday on the list submitted by the premier.
"Parliament received the programme and the names. There will be a session after 2:00 pm (1100 GMT) tomorrow for voting on the new ministers," Nujaifi told a news conference in Baghdad.
"Our desire is to build a strong government capable of solving the crisis of the country, and we will be proud of that," he said.
Maliki indicated to reporters that his task had not been easy.
"The process of distributing the ministries was difficult, and forming a national unity government is a difficult job, because you have to find a place for each winner," Maliki said.
"Tomorrow, the names will be announced, and some names need to be studied," he said.
According to Hassan Sineid, a deputy close to Maliki, the proposed appointments include Hoshyar Zebari retaining his post as foreign minister, outgoing deputy prime minister Rafa al-Essawi becoming head of the finance ministry and deputy oil minister Abdulkarim al-Luaybi taking charge of the oil ministry.
Zebari was chosen from the Kurdish Alliance, Essawi from the Iraqiya list of ex-premier Iyad Allawi and Luaybi is an independent chosen by the National Alliance, a Maliki-led pan-Shiite coalition.
Sineid, speaking on Iraqiya television on Monday evening, said that Ziad Tareq, chosen by the Iraqiya bloc, is the proposed new electricity minister; Hassan al-Shammari, with the National Alliance, is to head the justice ministry; while government spokesman Ali al-Dabbagh remains in the post.
Iraqiya, he said, also presented Ahmed Nasser Delli to head the ministry of industry and Ezzedine al-Dawla to lead agriculture. Hassan al-Shammari, of the National Alliance is proposed to head the ministry of Justice.
Maliki's State of Law coalition won 89 seats in the elections, two fewer than Allawi's Iraqiya bloc. But neither won enough for a parliamentary majority, resulting in an impasse that has still to be finally resolved.
According to a parliamentary source, Maliki has only submitted names for 29 cabinet posts, or roughly 70 percent of the total.
Earlier Monday, politicians had said that as many as half of the ministerial positions were still undecided as party chiefs squabbled over allocations.
"The problem is that many political blocs are all asking for the same post at the same time. Because of this, there is still no agreement," Khaled al-Assadi, an MP in Maliki's coalition who is seen as close to the premier, said early Monday.
According to Assadi, the National Alliance, a Maliki-led pan-Shiite coalition, will control 17 ministries, while Iraqiya will hold nine. The Kurdish bloc will retain seven, with the rest divided among smaller groupings.
The political impasse has existed since elections in March, with a deadline looming on Saturday for a new government to be in place.
According to the Iraqi constitution, parliament must approve the names of the ministers as well as the government's programme.
Politicians had at the weekend said any cabinet proposed on Monday would not include the naming of new ministers of interior, defence and national security, meaning Maliki would take interim control of Iraq's security forces.
That is despite past criticism that the premier has steadily tightened his grip on power by grouping increasing responsibilities under the office of the prime minister.
Including Maliki's own position and that of his three expected deputy prime ministers, the cabinet will number 42, slightly larger than the previous one.
