During the overnight period of Monday, Dec. 20, a total lunar eclipse will give children and adults alike all over North America another reason to look to the sky with excited eyes during the Christmas season. What's more, this event will occur during the Winter Solstice, the astronomical event that marks the first day of winter. In fact, parents can tell their children that they can stay up late tonight to see something in the Christmas season sky that is red and wondrous (weather permitting). Of course, they might not see the sled and reindeer that they are expecting, but the winter solstice's total lunar eclipse should put on quite a show.
Winter Solstice Lunar Eclipse Times
According to NASA, the eclipse will begin at 1:33 a.m. Eastern standard time, and will last until 5:01 a.m. on Tuesday morning. That means that West Coast viewers, of course, can see the eclipse begin at 10:33 p.m. on Monday night, running until 2:01 a.m. Between the hours of 2:41EST and 3:53 a.m. EST the moon will be completely covered by the Earth's shadow.
What is a Lunar Eclipse?
The term lunar eclipse means that the Earth comes between the moon and the sun for a brief period so that the moon is either partially or completely covered by the Earth's shadow. In this case, we will experience a total lunar eclipse meaning that the moon will be totally covered by the Earth's shadow, making it seem to darken during the height of the event. Because the diameter of the Earth's shadow at the distance of the moon's orbit is much larger than the moon itself, the moon will be completely covered in the Earth's shadow, also called the Earth's umbra, for an hour and twelve minutes tonight.
Viewing the Total Lunar Eclipse
While the moon is completely covered in shadows, it does not completely disappear. There is still enough light falling upon it to keep it visible to the naked eye. It will, however, be much dimmer, and will take on a very red cast while so cloaked. Unlike a solar eclipse, it is perfectly safe to watch the lunar eclipse without eye protection. Binoculars or telescopes can be used to view the lunar eclipse with no risk of damage to the eyes.
Why Does the Moon Turn Red During the Total Lunar Eclipse?
During the height of the total lunar eclipse, the only light reaching the moon is the sunlight that is filtered and scattered by the Earth's atmosphere. As it happens, our atmosphere tends to filter out or effectively soak up blue wavelengths as the sunlight passes through it on the way to the moon. This leaves mostly red wavelengths to fall upon the moon during the eclipse. The effect can be demonstrated in the classroom using a disk of red cellophane, a flashlight, and a model of the moon.
What's a Winter Solstice?
The northern hemisphere's Winter Solstice is the day upon which North Pole leans furthest away from the sun. Although we say the winter solstice marks the beginning of winter, the days actually begin to get longer and the Earth's axis begins to align the northern hemisphere more directly with the sun's rays each day after the winter solstice. The winter solstice is, therefore, the shortest day of the year, although it is still some time before the northern hemisphere starts getting enough sunlight to begin warming up again. Read more about the solstice and equinox here .
Rare Coincidence of Winter Solstice and Total Lunar Eclipse
Although there are lunar eclipses and winter solstices every year, it is extremely rare for them to both occur at the same time. Lunar eclipses are also visible only from certain parts of the globe. For it to be visible, the moon must be up in the visible part of the sky when the eclipse occurs. This year, every place in North America will be able to watch the entire lunar eclipse from start to finish, weather permitting. Cloudy skies will, however, block the view in some parts of the country. Be sure to check Weather.Yahoo.com for your local forecast before telling the kids they can stay up late to watch the eclipse. Follow Space Matters on Facebook or @space_matters on Twitter.Brad Sylvester writes about the space program for the Yahoo! Contributor Network. Watching the Apollo missions through the static on a small black and white television sparked a lifelong interest in the space sciences for him. Since then, he has spent 40 years watching improvements in the technologies of space travel and our understanding of the universe unfold.

