While many consumers are usually used purchasing electronics at a steep discount right before the holidays, the sheer number of smartphones having their prices cut is almost unbelievable. Included smartphone devices are Apple's iPhone 4 and iPhone 3Gs, Google's newly released Nexus S, Droid Incredible and Sony's XPERIA X10, among others-all since Dec. 1.
 Apple's iPhone. The current iPhone 4 price cut is the second legitimate discount since its release; the first was at Radio Shack, which offered it for $149 and the iPhone 3GS for $49. This time, consumers are getting a break at Sam's Club in the U.S., according to a copy of a Kiosk Priority Note detailing the iPhone 4 and iPhone 3Gs sale.  The Apple iPhone 4 will be offered at $147, $2 cheaper than Radio Shack, which is typically the cheapest offered at $149. The iPhone 3Gs will be offered at $47 and Radio Shack has them for $49. Both price cuts at Sam's Club will be available to members only but will end Christmas Eve 2010. Of course, both versions of the iPhones are offered with the usual two-year contract in addition to being locked to AT&amp;T. 
 Google's Nexus S. Another unbelievable price cut in the works is that of the Google Nexus S. This smartphone was just released at Best Buy in the U.S. on Dec. 16, although the Nexus S price cut will only be available to European consumers. However, the device has yet to see European consumers since its previously announced release date today. The discount will apply to those shopping at the Carphone Warehouse in the U.K. -- the only place consumers can pre-order it for $665, $186 less than the original price. The upside is that for those who have already ordered the smartphone at the original price the discount will be applied to their accounts. 
 Free Droid Incredible, Sony XPERIA X10, LG Optimus S. Yes, Best buy has been offering a variety of smartphones free every day. This move was part of the original Phone a Day campaign, which ended Oct. 31. The overwhelming success of the campaign sparked the company to offer at least four different smartphones free every day until Dec. 31. While there is no way to know which phone will be offered on what day, Best Buy assured consumers in a news release that at least one phone from each major carrier -- AT&amp;T, Sprint, Verizon and T-Mobile -- will be available. The details of the campaign state that consumers participating must agree to a two-year contract for new or upgraded smartphones.  
With the recession finally letting up and the smorgasbord of new smartphones on the market, the reality is that many wireless carriers and manufacturers want to make up for lost ground. Just keep in mind, though, that many carriers, such as Verizon and AT&amp;T have increased their respective termination fees for early ended contracts. While most do not have to worry, these increases make up for the subsidized prices of the smartphones, ensuring that the carriers do not lose out on the cost of the smartphones should a customer cancel their service. Many consumers are hoping to rake in deals for the holiday shopping season and these are certainly deals that they will not want to miss.
 Jessica (JC) Torpey is a self-taught computer technician with more than 10 years experience in the field. JC's passion is studying the various political and business aspects of the technology industry. Combining that knowledge with her love of computers, JC uses it to influence her writing.

