A "Honeycomb"-powered tablet from Motorola? 4G-ready Android smartphones on Verizon? Well, neither Motorola nor Verizon Wireless have anything official to say about what they've got in store for the Consumer Electronics Show next month, but that hasn't stopped the mobile giants from teasing us on Twitter and YouTube.
First up is Verizon, which took to its official Twitter feed to hint — oh so subtly — that Android fans hoping for a dose of 4G speed in their next smartphones won't be disappointed.


Verizon won't have anything official to announce until January 6, the day of its CES 2011 press conference, but the carrier was happy to stir the pot Monday with this tweet: "Jan. 6 at #CES: #Android and #LTE - could it be like peanut butter and chocolate? YUM!"
It doesn't take a genius to put two and two together and make a bold prediction: to wit, that we'll be seeing some 4G LTE (short for "Long Term Evolution") Android smartphones during Verizon's CES presser, which will focus primarily on the carrier's just-launched 4G data network.
Among the possible 4G Android phones we might see from Verizon next month: this mysterious LG smartphone, which may or may not be a version of the dual-core, Tegra 2-powered Optimus 2X. (The backs of the two phones look slightly different, but hey — you never know.)
Another possibility: the long-rumored HTC Mecha, a.k.a. the Droid Incredible HD — an enticing possibility, although HTC's Peter Chou recently told Mobile World Live that an LTE-ready handset from HTC might not arrive until the second half of next year.
Moving along, we've got another pretty obvious CES teaser, this time in the form of a YouTube video from Motorola.
Entitled "Tablet Evolution," the slick video takes place in what appears to be an exhibit of tablet technology throughout the ages, starting with a wall-sized tablet of Egyptian hieroglyphics ("good graphics, but weight makes difficult for portability," the wry captions read) before moving on to the Ten Commandments ("excellent durability, but zero flexibility — can't edit") and the Rosetta Stone ("multilingual support, but low-resolution screen").
The cheeky tablet exhibit also features a couple of slightly newer tablets, including the iPad ("it's like a giant iPhone, but &hellip; it's like a giant iPhone) and the Samsung Galaxy Tab ("Android OS, but Android OS &hellip; for a phone").
All that is just a preamble, of course, for the final stop on the tour: a tablet covered by a black shroud, sitting atop a pedestal stamped with Motorola's distinctive "M" logo — and then a bee appears in the frame, buzzing its way right up to the mystery product. "CES 2011," the final caption reads.
 
What are we talking about here? Well, it's a pretty safe guess that this is the same Motorola-built, Tegra 2-powered Android tablet that Google exec Andy Rubin was showing off just a few weeks ago. And what's the deal with the bee? Probably a coy reference to "Honeycomb," the upcoming update to Android that's said to focus primarily on tablet features.
All in all, very interesting, although there's also been speculation that the individual Verizon and Motorola rumors — which, of course, are being fed by the companies themselves — might meld into a single product: a 4G, Android-powered MotoPad. Now that would be worth writing home about.
— Ben Patterson is a technology writer for Yahoo! News.
Follow me on Twitter!

