At long last, Google has opened its Chrome Web Store. Google first mentioned the store for its open-source browser at its I/O conference in May.
The web apps Google is listing in the store are regular web applications built with standard web tools and technologies. The applications will also run in other browsers that support these technologies.
Although there are a growing number of free apps online, Google decided it was time to build a single open marketplace where consumers can find them. The Chrome store also gives developers opportunities to reach consumers by offering a single platform where consumers can search for apps. The store is currently only available in the U.S., but Google promised to expand it early next year.
Google's Good Timing
"Developers have already started uploading apps, and we expect the number to grow over time," Linus Upson, vice president of engineering, and Sundar Pichai, vice president of product management, wrote in a Google blog post. "The store will be featured prominently in Chrome, helping people discover great apps and developers reach millions of users around the world."
Greg Sterling, principal analyst at Sterling Market Intelligence, is bullish on the prospects for the Chrome Web Store. As he sees it, the mobile market, the popularity of mobile apps, and other online stores such as the Salesforce app exchange paved the way for the Chrome store. 
"Given that no software can be downloaded to the new Chrome OS notebooks, apps are a way to provide a richer desktop-like software experience in the browser," Sterling said. "It also creates a way for developers to make money on browser-based software where they might have trouble charging for site access in a conventional web environment."
Chrome OS in the Enterprise?
Meanwhile, Google is planting seeds about Chrome OS notebooks' potential in the enterprise. Google pointed to InterContinental Hotels as a case study for Chrome OS notebooks in call centers, business service centers, and hotel guest use. Bryson Koehler, a vice president at InterContinental, said the speed, simplicity and security benefits of Google Chrome are benefiting his operation.
"We have 13 call centers around the world with thousands of agents whose goal is to get our customers the information they need as fast as possible. We believe the Chrome notebooks will provide our agents with the fastest experience for the web apps and sites that they use to support our customers," Koehler said. "By reducing the average time per call, we'll both increase customer satisfaction and significantly reduce our costs. And from an IT perspective, we won't have to spend countless hours manually installing security patches and upgrades to operating systems and client software."
Koehler also said the guest log-in feature of the Chrome OS notebooks is ideal for the hotel's business centers because it gives guests a secure browsing experience while preventing them from leaving behind any sensitive information.
Sterling also sees possibilities for Chrome OS in the enterprise. In fact, he said, "I think it might be a much bigger play in the enterprise than among consumers -- unless it's really cheap."

