Six weeks of lame-duck legislating should be more than enough to convince President Barack Obama that&nbsp;two more years of this would be a drag. 
Obama has scored more legislative victories than first&nbsp;seemed likely following the Democrats&rsquo; drubbing in the midterm elections. But the session winding down this week also highlighted, in painful ways, the narrow lanes in which Obama is operating &mdash; cutting deals on terms that were largely set by other Washington players. 
He&rsquo;s confined on the right by the incoming Republican House majority and the reality of deep budget deficits. He&rsquo;s confined on the left by his own sullen Democrats, including many liberals who will be quick to protest if they feel Obama is selling them out or cynically&nbsp;lurching to the center. 
Obama&rsquo;s cramped circumstances, according to numerous veterans of previous White Houses and other experts, highlight his urgent need to reinvent his presidency &mdash; discarding the Congress-focused strategy of the first two years and coming up with new and more creative ways to exercise power and set the national agenda.&nbsp;(See: Obama makes the sale)
&ldquo;He needs to be CEO of America,&rdquo; said former White House chief of staff John Podesta, an Obama sympathizer who ran his transition to power after the 2008 election and is now urging him to dramatically refashion his presidency. 
The West Wing makeover, as Podesta and others see it, would involve Obama no longer &ldquo;being Velcroed to the Hill&rdquo; and giving more attention to powers of the presidency that don&rsquo;t involve signing bills into law. 
Among those powers: executive orders that advance Obama&rsquo;s agenda without involving&nbsp;Congress, new policy ideas that transcend Washington&rsquo;s usual left and right divisions and speeches that summon people to meet the long-term challenges facing the country, even, or especially, when the remedies involve more than actions by the federal government. 
&ldquo;It is a bully pulpit role as leader of the country,&rdquo; Podesta said, &ldquo;to give people a sense of both the challenge of the project &mdash; and the opportunity of the project &mdash; of moving the country to a better place.&rdquo; 
These types of moves, according to another veteran Washington operative with West Wing experience, would change the optics of Obama&rsquo;s presidency, because&nbsp;successful presidents don&rsquo;t allow themselves to be seen as just another player at a Capitol Hill poker table.&nbsp;(See: Will history prove kinder to Bush?)
&ldquo;One of the problems he&rsquo;s had up until now is that he hasn&rsquo;t, given the powers of the office, he hasn&rsquo;t often positioned himself to be taller than everyone else on the field,&rdquo; the operative said. 
Even before the midterm elections, many advisers around Obama essentially agreed with the critique that&nbsp;he needs to liberate himself from the &ldquo;scrum of Capitol Hill,&rdquo; as Podesta put it. (See:&nbsp;Obama arrives home to new reality)
As a practical matter, however, many of the biggest items on Obama&rsquo;s agenda&mdash;from health care reform to the stimulus &mdash; necessarily involved a legislative strategy. And now that Republican gains in Congress make it essential for him to use new avenues of power, Obama&rsquo;s West Wing is not especially well-equipped for the challenge. 
Unlike his immediate five predecessors &mdash; everyone since Gerald Ford &mdash; Obama came to the office with no previous executive experience. And his West Wing is dominated by people who grew up on Capitol Hill as aides and legislative strategists. For these people, finding more creative ways to use the presidency &mdash; and ensuring that Obama dominates the national agenda even if his party does not dominate Washington &mdash; will be a learning experience.
Presidential scholars and veterans of previous administrations&nbsp;from both parties point to five strategies past presidents have used to meet the challenge Obama is confronting now:
Grow the White House staff &mdash; by 2 million people 
Two million is the number of people working for the executive branch, not including the armed services or postal service. The most ambitious presidents find ways to make sure that all of them work for the West Wing&nbsp;in some way.&nbsp;
Former president Bill Clinton, who similarly had to abandon a legislative approach after Democrats&nbsp;were bounced from power in 1994, was the most creative president in the modern era at using the powers of the executive branch in legitimate ways that nonetheless expressly served his own political ends as he prepared for reelection in 1996.&nbsp;
Clinton issued&nbsp;an executive order to turn 1.7 million acres in Utah into the Grand Staircase of the Escalante National Monument, a far-reaching move that thrilled environmentalists. He announced the move not in Utah, but in Arizona, a swing state. During his reelection campaign in&nbsp;his second&nbsp;White House term, Clinton set up a de facto think tank run by senior adviser Tom Freedman, who scoured the executive branch for ideas that the president could embrace and make his own. 
Many of the ideas&nbsp;were things the government would do anyway &mdash; but were fashioned to help the president. There were new Agriculture Department rules on meat inspection over the Fourth of July weekend, when voters were more apt to grill. There was also&nbsp;a new Department of Veterans Affairs initiative,&nbsp;which coincided with Memorial Day,&nbsp;to expand benefits&nbsp;to people who had been exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam. 
Podesta said Obama should similarly set up a &ldquo;Skunk Works&rdquo; in the Treasury Department to hunt for ideas across the government and the private sector that the president could trumpet to demonstrate his obsession with job creation. 
The executive branch mindset may not come naturally to Obama, who has a&nbsp;background as a state and national legislator. He deplored and campaigned against what he called the abuses of executive power on national security and civil liberties policies under former President George W. Bush and former Vice President Dick Cheney. 
Still, Obama might want to at least channel the spirit of an earlier Democrat. In the 1960s, a young Air Force airman famously told President Lyndon B. Johnson, &ldquo;This is your&nbsp;helicopter, sir.&rdquo; 
Johnson responded, &ldquo;They&rsquo;re all my helicopters, son.&rdquo; 
Draw new lines &mdash; with new ideas 
The Congress-focused strategy has given Obama some highly consequential victories, including a far-reaching overhaul of health care and, this past weekend, the repeal of the Clinton-era &ldquo;don&rsquo;t ask, don&rsquo;t tell&rdquo; policy on gays in the military. 
For the most part, however, Obama&rsquo;s big ideas to date have served to spark arguments that divide Washington along familiar left and right lines that have existed for decades. Two of the most promising issues on which policy experts say Obama could break free of stale ideological categories are&nbsp;energy (on which many conservatives support moving away from carbon-based power) and education (on which many liberals are wary of teachers unions and support radical experimentation). 
Third Way, the centrist Democratic think tank, is urging Obama to focus&nbsp;on issues&nbsp;for which debate transcends traditional partisan terms. Among the group&rsquo;s suggestions: tax reform that could cut rates and close loopholes and changes to the Defense Department procurement process to create incentives for clean-energy investment. Third Way also hopes Obama will find a way over the next two years to strike a bipartisan immigration deal to&nbsp;overcome past stalemates on the issue, although Saturday&rsquo;s defeat of the DREAM Act shows just how difficult that will be.
&ldquo;None of these are small ideas&nbsp;&mdash; they are big and bold,&rdquo; said Matt Bennett, a Third Way cofounder. &ldquo;But they defy easy ideological pigeonholing. ... Now he can finally put meat on the bones of his &lsquo;postpartisan&rsquo; identity.&rdquo; 
Podesta&rsquo;s group, the Center for American Progress, last month issued a 54-page report with dozens of steps Obama could take to advance progressive ideas via executive power, ranging from the&nbsp;big and substantive (slapping a fee on imported oil to discourage consumption) to the small and symbolic (revamping the recovery.gov website to better track public spending or appointing a special envoy for the Horn of Africa). 
The CAP report urged protecting more federal land and generating solar energy on Air Force hangar roofs, as well as speeding up the implementation of an already-passed small-business jobs act that adds bigger incentives for hiring and purchasing and promoting automatic mediation to avoid more home foreclosures. A more divisive step would be giving the new consumer financial protection bureau a broad mandate to show&nbsp;that Obama is&nbsp;serious about getting tough on Wall Street. 
Though coming from different spots on the ideological agenda, the CAP and Third Way ideas have a common theme: they would show Obama &mdash; not incoming House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio), or Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) for that matter &mdash; is the dominant figure setting the national agenda. 
&ldquo;The Republicans are going to set the agenda in the House,&rdquo; said presidential scholar Charles O. Jones. &ldquo;That doesn&rsquo;t mean he can&rsquo;t influence it.&rdquo; 
Co-opt the opposition 
Republicans rode a huge wave of conservative anger and energy to power in the 2010 elections. Obama&rsquo;s challenge is to make sure that wave is a spent force by 2012 &mdash; in part by letting conservatives think they have achieved some of what they want. 
One way to do that, some presidential observers suggest, is by appointing a prominent Republican &mdash; ideally someone with high-level business experience&nbsp;&mdash; to a top position in his administration. Another common way to do that is rhetorically, which was the idea behind Clinton's 1996 State of the Union address when he&nbsp;announced, &ldquo;The era of Big Government is over.&rdquo; 
Liberals will chafe at such steps. But the idea is to co-opt the opposition &mdash; not to capitulate to it. Clinton made that statement as a tactical move to advance his larger strategy, which was to preserve Medicare and Social Security and expand government into new areas. 
In Obama&rsquo;s case, he would be taking symbolic steps in order to preserve his substantive agenda. 
&ldquo;You stiff-arm your own party in both houses and cooperate with the other party. The American system calls for that,&rdquo; said Yale political scientist David Mayhew, who wrote a landmark book on how divided government can be legislatively productive. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a politically induced opening to try to get things done even if it requires inventive coalitions.&rdquo; 
Be leader of the country &mdash; not just the government 
Many of the issues average voters care about don&rsquo;t relate directly to federal government programs: Are children being corrupted by a coarse and degrading popular culture? Is the country too divided by race and class? Is the United States well-positioned in the world or shadowed by the prospect of long-term decline?
After the 1994 elections put his own relevance in doubt, Clinton spent much of the balance of his six years talking about things like school prayer, local education and television sex and violence. All these things were -- at least under conventional presidential powers &mdash; only tangentially within his purview. 
But nontraditional powers can have results. The Welfare to Work Foundation that Clinton started in 1996 at the recommendation of Freedman and the late Eli Segal&nbsp;after signing welfare reform into law encouraged private corporations to hire millions of people off welfare rolls. 
&ldquo;President Obama has a similar opportunity: to be the one who explains, who articulates what that common ground really is, securing the place where I think most Americans, especially the independents, want him to be&nbsp;... while preserving and protecting as much as he wants to around his core agenda,&rdquo; said Don Baer, a top adviser to Clinton during that period. 
The Obama crowd may not like being pointed to the Clinton example. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re almost psychotic about not being Clinton,&rdquo; said one person close to Obama and his staff. Many Obama aides believe the 42nd president practiced a small-minded, defensive brand of politics, though some acknowledge that their own recent setbacks have given them a new appreciation of Clinton&rsquo;s survival skills. 
But if they prefer, they can look to a different example: former President Ronald Reagan used his rhetorical gifts to shape the mood and agenda of the country in ways that had impact beyond legislation. 
&ldquo;Even when things were tough, he had that inspirational ability,&rdquo; said David Abshire, a special counselor to Reagan during his second term who now runs the Center for the Study of the Presidency and Congress. &ldquo;This president had it and lost it.&nbsp;... He&rsquo;s got to regain the mountain top.&nbsp;... He did it in the inaugural; did it in his Nobel acceptance speech. Now, in most of his stuff, he&rsquo;s the professor teaching constitutional law.&rdquo; 
Wheels up 
Foreign policy, including overseas travel,&nbsp;is the traditional refuge of presidents who have lost influence at home. Even former President Richard Nixon in the weeks before his resignation could receive big crowds and deferential treatment on a trip to the Middle East. 
Obama&rsquo;s challenge may be somewhat more complex: A sullen and uncertain war in Afghanistan creates some of his most pressing policy and political burdens in advance of 2012. 
Still, he too will likely come to appreciate the largely unchecked influence to set policy enjoyed by modern presidents &mdash; even ones who were badgered by adversaries on the home front. Beyond Obama&rsquo;s defensive agenda of winding down two wars inherited from his predecessor, he has a robust list of accomplishments he&rsquo;s seeking abroad on nuclear nonproliferation, climate change and Middle East peace. 
Even in an era of partisanship, Americans of all stripes like to see their presidents respected and successful on the global stage &mdash; a fact that gives Obama wide latitude to be effective without a single bill-signing ceremony. 
&ldquo;He needs to make his new efforts about a much bigger purpose than the way they appear right now, about more than just legislative wheeling and dealing,&rdquo; said Baer. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not just about finding the middle ground. It&rsquo;s about finding the higher ground.&rdquo;
Read More Stories from POLITICOMcConnell plans power plays against DemsHouse Races Live: Twitter concessionSenate Races Live: Buck lead increasesGovernors' Races Live: Unlucky sevenNo endgame on Hill as Christmas nears
