Learn which careers make the best sequels.

By Chris Kyle

Who said sequels have to stink? With the right work experience, your second career can be a big hit.

Marc Freedman has identified a growing trend in his book Encore: Finding Work That Matters in the Second Half of Life. "An increasing number of employers see the value of responsible, stable grown-ups who know what's expected in the workplace and have a track record of experience," he writes.

[Train for your second-act career. Find schools now!]

If you are thinking of changing careers, you're not alone. As many as 8.4 million Americans have already launched "encore" careers, according to a 2008 study by the MetLife Foundation and Civic Ventures, a San Francisco think tank. And those numbers have surely surged as the economy continues to evolve.

Want to find a new career and wondering where to start? Check out our best second-act careers and see how your experience can help you land a new job that features great pay and job security.

#1 Career - Medical Assistant

If you want to start your second-act career fast, look into one-year certificate programs in medical assisting. Medical assistants support doctors and other health care professionals with office and clinical work, like collecting blood samples. Administrative experience is a real asset when transitioning into a career as a medical assistant, as is a background in bookkeeping and billing.

[Find Medical Assistant schools near you]
Medical Assistant Outlook: Business is booming for medical assistants, who will enjoy a whopping 34 percent increase in job opportunities through 2018, according to the U.S. Department of Labor.

Average Salary:
Medical Assistants: $29,450

[Search for Medical Assistant career programs]

#2 Career - Paralegal

Office work is a strong foundation for becoming a paralegal or legal secretary, both of whom perform a wide range of administrative skills while assisting lawyers. Professionalism and an eye for detail are also paramount since duties also include conducting research and interviewing witnesses. For those who already have a degree, a certificate in paralegal studies is an excellent way to get started.

[Find Paralegal schools near you]

Paralegal Outlook: Staffing firm Robert Half International pegged paralegals as one of its hottest careers for 2011. Looking ahead, the Department of Labor predicts a 28 percent jump in employment opportunities for paralegals and legal secretaries in the 2008-2018 timeframe.

Average Salary:
Paralegals: $50,080

[Search for Paralegal training programs near you]
#3 Career - Marketing

Professionals with a talent for communicating with consumers and understanding their ways can find great success in marketing. Any business experience, whether it's with a big or small firm, can also help you land a job in marketing. Fluency in a foreign language will also look great on a resume.

[Train for this exciting second-act career at a top Business school]

Marketing Outlook: Twelve percent of marketing executives expect to increase staff levels in the first quarter of 2011, according to a study by the Creative Group, a national staffing firm.

Average Salary:
Market Research Analysts: $67,500
Marketing Managers: $120,070

[Search for Marketing and Business programs]
#4 Career - Human Resources

The many hats worn by HR-types make it an ideal second-act career. The job requires a healthy mix of business and communication skills, so talented professionals with backgrounds in marketing, finance, accounting, IT, PR, or sales all boast directly applicable skills.

[Find HR and Business degree programs]
HR Outlook: Job security is another plus, since HR opportunities are expected to jump 22 percent through 2018, according to the Department of Labor.

Average Salary:
HR Specialists: $59,070
HR Managers: $105,510

[Search for HR and Business degree programs]
#5 Career - Accounting

Are you an analytical problem-solver who is detail-oriented and computer savvy? If so, you can successfully build upon those skills when moving into a second-act accounting career. While a background in finance, economics or mathematics is an advantage, it's not always a requirement.

[Train for this hot second-act career. Find Accounting and Finance schools.]
Accounting Outlook: Separate 2010 surveys of CFOs by global accounting firm Grant Thornton and staffing firm Robert Half International found that qualified accounting candidates are hard for employers to find. The Department of Labor estimates that accounting jobs will grow 22 percent through 2018.

Average Salary:
Accountants: $56,850
Finance Managers: $135,290

[Search for Accounting and Finance programs]
#6 Career - Health Care Administration

Experience with the day-to-day operations of running an office or business can help you land a second-act career in health care administration. Customer service skills will also help ease the transition, since, like any other business, you're working with customers (in this case, patients).

[Find Health Care Administration degree programs]

Health Care Administration Outlook: Job security in health care is as good as it gets these days. Want proof? Ten of the 20 fastest growing jobs are in health care, according to the Department of Labor.

Average Salary:
Health Care Support Workers: $31,340
Health Services Managers: $90,970

[Search for Health Care Administration career programs]
*Average salary comes from the U.S. Department of Labor, using 2009 median salary information.
