Roger Federer may have book-ended the season with big prizes - the Australian Open in January and the Tour finale in November - but his achievements, while substantial, are overshadowed in the final reckoning by what came in between.

2010 belonged to Rafael Nadal. An amazing season, almost impossible to repeat, included three successive majors, three successive Masters 1000 titles on clay, and - as he noted with his usual positivity - four victories over top eight players in the final week of the season.

He didn't win the ATP World Tour Finals but he did enough to prove the doubters of 12 months ago wrong.

Remember, in 2009 he failed to win a set at the O2 as his knees creaked beneath him. In 2010 the Spaniard raised his game, changed his grip and stayed fit from February to November, a considerable feat considering the physical intensity of his play and his recent injury record.

Now, rather than pack his bags for a holiday, Nadal intends to spend this week promoting the sport with a series of TV appearances and he'll be back on the practice court the following Monday.

"Thank you, see you next year, Merry Christmas," he said to the press on Sunday night before heading off to his tapas restaurant of choice in central London.

For Roger Federer, the previous world number one, the plot to unseat his rival continues and, having been out-titled this season, he claimed an important victory right at the end.

If he is to recover some ground in the rankings - and the difference between number one and two is substantial by recent measures - and reclaim the major titles which have passed to Spain, he needs every edge going into the new year.

There are those who believe Federer has been cruising for the past couple of seasons. Not now. The hiring of Paul Annacone to work as coach alongside Severin Luthi has coincided with renewed burst of Swiss vigour.

In the final two months of the season he won three titles - Stockholm, Basel and London -and one or two Nadal-specific adjustments were clearly evident.

A few years ago he introduced the forehand drop shot into his repertoire and now we have the topspin backhand, not always his party piece, working as effectively as it ever has. In the first and third sets of the O2 final it was simply sensational.

A million backhands have been struck against Nadal, a consequence of playing a left-hander who likes to whip cross court, and Federer's favoured slice hasn't always worked.
Low balls used to catch out Nadal, not any more. So the addition of pace and bounce, coupled with greater reliability on the so-called weaker wing, provides a fascinating twist to their tactical rivalry.

Andy Murray's topsy-turvy year ended on a considerable high with his sparkling performance against Nadal in the semis. Like many of his previous contests with the Spaniard, it was full of attacking intent and the sort of "let's-do-this-at-the-majors" aggression required.

Murray ends the year as he started it; playing with great clarity of thought. The way he played against Nadal is the way he wants to play all the time. That will be music to the ears of his many supporters who believe he can fulfil his potential if he shows the same belief in his ability as they have.

The shot he played at 6-6 in the final tie-break against Nadal was an indication. He missed it, but he went for it. Good luck to anyone who backs themselves. Next time he won't miss it.

As his former coach Miles Maclagan said during the week on 5 Live Sports Extra's coverage from the O2, none of the greats got where they did by sitting back and waiting for mistakes up the other end.

Another exciting and, hopefully, profitable year is ahead for the British man.

So the top four in the world - and a notable mention at this point for Novak Djokovic, who represented himself superbly in London despite the forthcoming Davis Cup final in Belgrade - contested a memorable finals weekend. But earlier, the group phase had stumbled to a disappointing conclusion.

A lacklustre Andy Roddick waved the white flag across the net to Djokovic in the final round-robin match. At least that's how it felt.

For a man who needed to win in straight sets, Roddick appeared unusually reserved - certainly a surprise to Djokovic who had prepared for the match by getting the young German, Tobias Kamke, to relentless serve and volley at him.

Only one of the 12 round-robin matches went to three sets, and Roddick v Nadal was no classic. There were several close first sets - Federer v Soderling, Nadal v Djokovic, Nadal v Berdych - but too often we found one player firing beneath full capacity. Similarly, the O2 Arena was far from full for many sessions.

Having said that, Ferrer versus Soderling, the least attractive of the group matches, was still watched by more than 14,000 people - a significant achievement on a cold winter's night - and the organisers showed the sort of gumption lacking elsewhere in the world by launching various last-minute promotions to boost sales.

It was another well-staged, well-attended event which brought tennis into the UK mainstream again.

Finally, a congratulatory mention for some sharp eyes; there were exactly 100 challenges to Hawkeye during the tournament and the decision of the officials was upheld 76 times.

And in a year when he sat in the umpire's chair for three days watching the same match (Isner/Mahut at Wimbledon), it was fitting that the world's consistently best official, Sweden's Mohamed Lahyani, took charge of the final match.
